                                                                                                                                                                            Mälardalen University Doctoral Dissertation 223



                                                                                                                                                       PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS




                                                                               Markus Jonsson PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES
                                                                                                                                                       AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES
                                                                                                                                                       Markus Jonsson




                                                                                                                                                                        →               →




Address: P.O. Box 883, SE-721 23 Västerås. Sweden
Address: P.O. Box 325, SE-631 05 Eskilstuna. Sweden
                                                      ISBN 978-91-7485-316-2
E-mail: info@mdh.se Web: www.mdh.se                   ISSN 1651-4238           2017
              Mälardalen University Press Dissertations
                              No. 223




PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES




                          Markus Jonsson

                                2017




           School of Education, Culture and Communication
Copyright © Markus Jonsson, 2017
ISBN 978-91-7485-316-2
ISSN 1651-4238
Printed by E-Print AB, Stockholm, Sweden
                   Mälardalen University Press Dissertations
                                     No. 223




     PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES



                                Markus Jonsson




                             Akademisk avhandling

som för avläggande av filosofie doktorsexamen i matematik/tillämpad matematik
 vid Akademin för utbildning, kultur och kommunikation kommer att offentligen
 försvaras fredagen den 5 maj 2017, 13.15 i Delta, Mälardalens högskola, Västerås.


   Fakultetsopponent: professor Johan Jonasson, Chalmers tekniska högskola




              Akademin för utbildning, kultur och kommunikation
Abstract
This thesis deals with processes on integer partitions and their limit shapes, with focus on deterministic
and stochastic variants on one such process called Bulgarian solitaire. The main scientific contributions
are the following.
Paper I: Bulgarian solitaire is a dynamical system on integer partitions of n which converges to a unique
fixed point if n=1+2+...+k is a triangular number. There are few results about the structure of the game
tree, but when k tends to infinity the game tree itself converges to a structure that we are able to analyze.
Its level sizes turns out to be a bisection of the Fibonacci numbers. The leaves in this tree structure are
enumerated using Fibonacci numbers as well. We also demonstrate to which extent these results apply
to the case when k is finite.
Paper II: Bulgarian solitaire is played on n cards divided into several piles; a move consists of picking
one card from each pile to form a new pile. In a recent generalization, σ-Bulgarian solitaire, the number
of cards you pick from a pile is some function σ of the pile size, such that you pick σ(h) < h cards from
a pile of size h. Here we consider a special class of such functions. Let us call σ well-behaved if σ(1) = 1
and if both σ(h) and h − σ(h) are non-decreasing functions of h. Well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire has a
geometric interpretation in terms of layers at certain levels being picked in each move. It also satisfies that
if a stable configuration of n cards exists it is unique. Moreover, if piles are sorted in order of decreasing
size then a configuration is convex if and only if it is a stable configuration of some well-behaved σ-
Bulgarian solitaire. If sorted configurations are represented by Young diagrams and scaled down to
have unit height and unit area, the stable configurations corresponding to an infinite sequence of well-
behaved functions (σ1, σ2, ...) may tend to a limit shape Φ. We show that every convex Φ with certain
properties can arise as the limit shape of some sequence of well-behaved σn. For the special case when
σn(h) = ceil(qnh) for 0 < qn ≤ 1 (where ceil is the ceiling function rounding upward to the nearest integer),
these limit shapes are triangular (in case qn2n → 0), or exponential (in case qn2n → ∞), or interpolating
between these shapes (in case qn2n → C > 0).
Paper III: We introduce pn-random qn-proportion Bulgarian solitaire (0 < pn,qn ≤ 1), played on n cards
distributed in piles. In each pile, a number of cards equal to the proportion qn of the pile size rounded
upward to the nearest integer are candidates to be picked. Each candidate card is picked with probability
pn, independently of other candidate cards. This generalizes Popov's random Bulgarian solitaire, in
which there is a single candidate card in each pile. Popov showed that a triangular limit shape is obtained
for a fixed p as n tends to infinity. Here we let both pn and qn vary with n. We show that under the
conditions qn2pnn/log n → ∞ and pnqn → 0 as n → ∞, the pn-random qn-proportion Bulgarian solitaire has
an exponential limit shape.
Paper IV: We consider two types of discrete-time Markov chains where the state space is a graded
poset and the transitions are taken along the covering relations in the poset. The first type of Markov
chain goes only in one direction, either up or down in the poset (an up chain or down chain). The second
type toggles between two adjacent rank levels (an up-and-down chain). We introduce two compatibility
concepts between the up-directed transition probabilities (an up rule) and the down-directed (a down
rule), and we relate these to compatibility between up-and-down chains. This framework is used to prove
a conjecture about a limit shape for a process on Young's lattice. Finally, we settle the questions whether
the reverse of an up chain is a down chain for some down rule and whether there exists an up or down
chain at all if the rank function is not bounded.




ISBN 978-91-7485-316-2
ISSN 1651-4238
Sammanfattning
Heltalspartitioner är matematiska objekt som är enkla att förstå. Det rör
sig helt enkelt om olika sätt att dela upp ett heltal som en summa av heltals-
delar. T.ex. är 2 + 2 och 2 + 1 + 1 två olika partitioner av 4. Ett sätt att
representera heltalspartitioner är i s.k. Youngdiagram, där delarna (sorter-
ade i fallande storleksordning) motsvaras av kolumner av rutor. Till exempel
är      Youngdiagrammet för 2 + 1 + 1.
     Bulgarisk patiens är en process som kan representeras med Youngdia-
gram. Den spelas med n identiska kort som delas upp i ett antal högar—
startkonfigurationen. Ett drag består i att ta ett kort från varje hög och
bilda en ny hög av de tagna korten. Detta drag upprepas om och om igen.
Varje konfiguration av kort kan ses som en heltalspartition av n, vars delar
är högstorlekarna. I termer av Youngdiagram består draget i att ta bort
raden längs ned och stoppa in den som en ny kolumn. Om antalet kort
är ett triangeltal har denna process en intressant egenskap: Oberoende av
hur startkonfigurationen ser ut kommer processen till slut att “fastna” i en
stabil konfiguration.
     Artikel I i denna avhandling studerar den specifika frågan: Hur många
konfigurationer finns det med ett givet antal drag d till den stabila konfigura-
tionen? Det visar sig att för tillräckligt små d ges svaret av ett Fibonaccital.
     Det finns många andra processer vars tillstånd låter sig representeras
av Youngdiagram. För denna typ av processer kan man studera processens
gränsform. Detta gör man genom att låta antalet rutor i diagrammet öka.
Om man hela tiden skalar ned storleken på rutorna så att diagrammets totala
area hålls konstant när antalet rutor ökar kan man jämföra diagrammens
form. Om denna form konvergerar mot en viss kurva när antalet rutor ökar,
kallar man denna kurva processens gränsform.
     Artikel II studerar en generalisering av bulgarisk patiens där man tillåts
ta fler än ett kort ur varje hög. För specialfallet där antal kort som tas
ur en hög är en given andel qn (som beror på n) av högens storlek bevisas
gränsformen, vilken beror på den asymptotiska egenskapen hos nqn2 när n
går mot oändligheten.
     Artikel III studerar en stokastisk generalisering av patiensen i artikel II.
Här är andelen qn av korten i varje hög kandidatkort, och varje sådant kort
tas med sannolikhet pn , oberoende av andra kandidatkort. Gränsformen i
fallet då nqn2 pn går mot oändligheten bevisas.
     Artikel IV bygger ett ramverk för en generell familj av processer. Där
introduceras ett kompatibilitetskoncept som används för att bevisa en exis-
terande förmodan om en gränsform.
Contents
Acknowledgements                                                              i

Structure of the thesis                                                      ii

Part I: Background and results                                                1
  1     Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
        1.1 Integer partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2
        1.2 Young diagrams and their shapes . . . . . . . . . . . .           3
        1.3 Distributions on partitions and their limit shapes . . .          3
        1.4 Processes on Young diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
  2     About paper I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
        2.1 Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
        2.2 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
        2.3 Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
        2.4 Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
  3     About paper II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
        3.1 σ-Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
        3.2 Results for well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . .       14
        3.3 qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
        3.4 Results for qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . .       16
        3.5 Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
  4     About paper III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
        4.1 p-random q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire . . . . . . . .        17
        4.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
        4.3 Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19
  5     About paper IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20
        5.1 Posets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
        5.2 Young’s lattice and Hasse walks . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
        5.3 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22
        5.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
        5.5 Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24

Part II: Papers                                                              28
The following papers are included in this thesis.

  I. Level sizes of the Bulgarian solitaire game tree
     Henrik Eriksson, Markus Jonsson
     The Fibonacci Quarterly (in press)

 II. Limit shapes of stable configurations of a generalized Bulgar-
     ian solitaire
     Kimmo Eriksson, Markus Jonsson, Jonas Sjöstrand
     Submitted manuscript

III. An exponential limit shape of random q-proportion Bulgarian
     solitaire
     Kimmo Eriksson, Markus Jonsson, Jonas Sjöstrand
     Submitted manuscript

IV. Markov chains on graded posets: Compatibility of up-directed
    and down-directed transition probabilities
    Kimmo Eriksson, Markus Jonsson, Jonas Sjöstrand
    Order (in press)
Acknowledgements
I firstly wish to acknowledge the excellent guidance and support by my
supervisors Kimmo Eriksson and Jonas Sjöstrand. Kimmo has always pro-
vided insightful advice, and has an exceptional ability to clarify matters and
sort out problems. Jonas is immensely knowledgeable and has taught me
a lot from various branches of mathematics, much needed when studying
asymptotic problems in combinatorics. I feel privileged having had the op-
portunity to work with such brilliant mathematicians. When we thought
of problems together, they seemed to always be a step or two ahead of me.
Many times I felt lucky that I was, at least eventually, able to catch up.
Thank you for your patience with me.
    The set of co-authors to my papers, apart from my supervisors, includes
Henrik Eriksson whom I thank for the ingenious idea of quasi-infinite Bul-
garian solitaire used in paper I.
    Because of Kimmo’s affiliation with the Centre for the Study of Cultural
Evolution at the Department of Archaeology and Classical Studies at Stock-
holm University, I have had the privilege to spend my time as a graduate
student there. (I must be one of the few PhD-students who has done re-
search in pure mathematics at an archaeology department.) This research
centre has provided one of the most intellectually stimulating environments
I have ever encountered. This is of course thanks to the people from various
disciplines who works or have worked there, some of whom deserve special
mention. Johan Lind, my favourite ethologist, has been my office mate the
last few years. His passion for science has been and continues to be an inspi-
ration. Anna Jon-And, thank you for making your colleagues at the centre
take much needed breaks from work, and not the least for your interest
in Bulgarian solitaire. Fredrik Jansson, Alexander Funcke, Patrik Linden-
fors, Magnus Enquist and Arne Jarrick —thank you for your company and
interesting discussions. You have truly enriched my time as a PhD student.
    My family “Jonssonligan” is a great source of strength. I thank my
brother Niklas and his wife Aiga and their children Nancy and Noel. Above
all I would like to thank my wife Marijane for her understanding, enter-
tainment and encouragement, and for believing in me. Our children Kajsa
and Freja are wonderful and necessary reminders that life is here and now.
Lastly, and most importantly, I wish to thank my parents, Ruth Jonsson
and Claes Jonsson, for their endless love and endless support—to them I
dedicate this thesis.




                                      i
Structure of the thesis
This thesis consists of two parts. Readers who are mostly interested in
technical details should go directly to the original research papers in part
II of the thesis. Others would probably gain more from reading the more
lightweight descriptions in part I. There I present the results, provide the
background information required to understand them, and put them in their
historical context.
    Where necessary, there is also a “Motivation” subsection that explains
the thoughts, observations and conjectures that inspired the paper.




                                     ii
Part I

Background and results




                1
1     Preliminaries
Let us begin with an introduction to the objects and concepts used in this
thesis: integer partitions and probability distributions on them, Young dia-
grams and their limit shapes and processes on Young diagrams.

1.1    Integer partitions
Integer partitions are among the mathematical objects that are easiest to
understand. It is all about different ways of writing a positive integer as a
sum of (weakly) smaller positive integers. For example,

            3 + 1,   2 + 2,   2 + 1 + 1,   1+1+1+1         and   4

are different partitions of the integer 4. In partition theory, 2+1+1, 1+2+1
and 1 + 1 + 2 are considered the same partition, and one usually writes the
parts in (weakly) decreasing order. The listed partitions are therefore all
partitions of 4. Thus there are five partitions of four, and we write p(4) = 5
where p(n) is the partition function. The number of partitions of 100 is
p(100) = 190, 569, 292.
    This seemingly innocent concept has raised a number of interesting prob-
lems and led to a lot of fascinating mathematical theory, which has since
then found applications to statistical mechanics, computer science and other
branches of mathematics. For example, it is easy to ask and understand the
question How many partitions p(n) are there of a given positive integer n?
It is not as easy to understand that the answer is
                                                q
                                                  π   2       1
                                                                 
                        ∞          √  d sinh k 3 x − 24 
                    1 X
          p(n) = √          Ak (n) k             q                        (1)
                                        dx
                                                                   
                  π 2 k=1                            x−   1
                                                      24
                                                                 x=n

where each Ak (n) is an explicitly given finite sum of 24kth roots of unity.
The equation (1) is the so called Hardy-Ramanujan-Rademacher expansion
of p(n), which was proved in 1937 by Hans Rademacher, building on earlier
work by G. H. Hardy and S. Ramanujan. A full proof can be found in [2].
    Not surprisingly, the foundations of the theory of integer partitions were
laid by Leonhard Euler, who also proved a number of beautiful and signifi-
cant partition theorems. A good introduction to this fascinating subject is
the book Integer Partitions [3] by George Andrews and Kimmo Eriksson.




                                      2
1.2   Young diagrams and their shapes
The partition 5 + 4 + 4 + 1 + 1 of 15 can be visualized as a geometric shape
like this:




The parts 5, 4, 4, 1, 1 of the partition are sorted in weakly decreasing order
and we draw rows of equally sized squares where the first row from the
bottom has 5 squares, the second row 4 squares, and so on, with a left
aligned margin. The result is called a Young diagram, after the British
mathematician Alfred Young.
    Young diagrams can be oriented in different ways. The above way of
drawing Young diagrams is sometimes called French notation. In paper II
and paper III they are instead drawn in such a way that the parts of the
partition are represented by columns rather than rows, so that the Young
diagram of the partition 5 + 4 + 4 + 1 + 1 looks like this:        .
    If we denote the partition 5 + 4 + 4 + 1 + 1 by λ, one usually writes
λ = (5, 4, 4, 1, 1). There is obviously a one-to-one correspondence between
partitions of n and Young diagrams with n squares. Therefore, if λ is a given
integer partition, it is common that λ also denotes the corresponding Young
diagram. We will be mostly concerned with the shape of a Young diagram.
To this end, let the squares have unit length and place the diagram in a
coordinate system as in Figure 1(a). We denote by ∂λ the function that
describes the boundary of the Young diagram λ as in Figure 1(b).
    All four papers in this thesis deals with Young diagrams in one way or
another.

1.3   Distributions on partitions and their limit shapes
There are p(n) integer partitions of a given integer n. Let us denote the set
of partitions of n by P(n). If we assign nonnegative values to each of these
partitions such that the sum of all these values is 1, we have a probability
distribution on P(n).
    For a given integer n, let us sample a partition λ at random according
to the probabilities in some distribution ν (n) on P(n), and draw its Young


                                      3
             (a) Diagram of λ                      (b) Function graph y = ∂λ(x)
  y                                           y
     6                                      6
 5                                         5t          d

 4                                         4

 3                                         3           t           d

 2                                         2

 1                                         1                       t    d

 0                                  -x     0                            t    -x
     0   1     2     3    4     5              0       1   2   3   4   5

Figure 1: The Young diagram (in French notation) and its boundary func-
tion of the partition λ = (5, 4, 4, 1, 1).

diagram boundary ∂λ. Doing this for larger and larger n, we get larger and
larger Young diagrams. If we scale down the row lengths of each diagram
by a factor 1/an and the column heights by a factor an /n so that the total
area of each diagram is 1, then we can compare their shapes. Let us denote
by ∂ an λ the boundary function of the diagram rescaled this way. If the
boundaries of these rescaled diagrams converge in probability to a certain
deterministic curve φ as n → ∞, this curve is the limit shape of the sequence
of distributions (ν (n) )n , in other words, if

                   lim ν (n) {λ ∈ P(n) : |∂ an λ(x) − φ(x)| < ε} = 1              (2)
                   n→∞

for all x > 0 and all ε > 0.
    Let us first consider the uniform distribution. The result of a sampling
                                                                   √
of partitions from this distribution with the scaling factor an = n can be
seen in Figure 2. As we can see, the diagram boundaries seem to approach
a limit shape. One of the famous results in this field is that Young diagrams
sampled and scaled this way do indeed have a limit shape, namely
                                    √              √
                              e−(π/ 6)x + e−(π/ 6)y = 1.

Note that this is a completely unbiased sampling: in the uniform distribution
on P(n), each partition has the exact same probability 1/p(n) to be picked.
The fact that this distribution has a limit shape at all is therefore a rather
astonishing result: Almost all partitions of a large integer “look” the same!

                                          4
 3                           3                            3
              n = 102                     n = 103                  n = 104

 2                           2                            2


 1                           1                            1


 0                           0                            0
     0    1       2     3        0    1         2   3         0    1      2      3

Figure 2: Young diagrams sampled uniformly at random from P(n), then
                                   √
downscaled with scaling factor an = n, for n = 102 , 103 , and 104 , with ten
samples in each graph.


     The study of this phenomenon of limit shape formation from the uniform
probability distribution on integer partitions has a long history, starting with
the paper by Temperley [28] in 1952 with heuristic arguments. In 1977 it
was made more formally in [27] although the result was not presented in
a modern way. This was done by Vershik and Kerov [32] in 1985. Since
then, a large number of distributions have been studied in terms of limit
shapes. A famous example is the limit shape of partitions chosen according
to the Plancherel distribution [18, 31] in connection to the study of longest
increasing subsequences of permutations drawn uniformly at random. A
survey of such limit shape results was made by Vershik in [33], who also
made a significant contribution [30] in 1996, stressing the close relationships
between these problems and statistical physics of ideal gas.
     For some probability distributions on partitions there is no limit shape,
i.e., no single shape is approached in probability. Vershik calls such cases
“non-ergodic”. These non-ergodic cases have been studied in some detail by
Yakubovich [34].

1.4      Processes on Young diagrams
In the previous section, we considered the sampling of Young diagrams
λ1 , λ2 , . . . where each λk ∈ P(k) is drawn according to some probability
distribution ν (k) on P(k), k = 1, 2, . . . . This yields a sequence (λ1 , λ2 , . . . )
of growing Young diagrams, where each diagram λk+1 has one more square
than the previous λk .
     An alternative way of obtaining such a sequence of randomly growing
Young diagrams is to start with a single square diagram λ1 = (1) and
sequentially add squares, one in each discrete time-step. The possible posi-
tions at which to add a square to a Young diagram while still maintaining

                                            5
a Young diagram are the inner corners, see Figure 3. Let the inner cor-
ner of λk ∈ P(k) at which to add a square to obtain λk+1 ∈ P(k + 1) (for
k = 1, 2, . . . ) be chosen at random. Then the resulting discrete-time random
process (λ1 , λ2 , . . . ) is called a birth process (or growth process) on Young
diagrams. Each step in such a process is called a birth step.
                            y
                            6
                        4 c     s

                        3       c           s

                        2
                        1                   c        s

                        0                            c -x
                            0   1   2   3   4   5    6
Figure 3: Inner corners (unfilled circles) and outer corners (filled circles) in
the Young diagram of the partition λ = (6, 4, 4, 1).

    Such birth processes have been studied in the past. When the inner cor-
ner is picked uniformly at random, the resulting birth process is a description
of a discrete-time version of a one-dimensional asymmetric particle system
whose limit behaviour was studied by Rost [21]. Also, Green, Nijenhuis
and Wilf [12] suggested an efficient algorithm for generating a Plancherel
distributed partition by means of such a birth process.
    A birth process naturally induces a probability distribution on each
P(1), P(2), . . . , and one can thereby study its limit shape as explained in
Section 1.3. This is done by Eriksson and Sjöstrand in [9] where both Rost’s
model and Nobel prize winning economist Herbert Simon’s model of urban
growth is formulated as a birth processes on Young diagrams. For example,
Rost’s model corresponds to a birth process wherein all inner corners are
                                                                            √
equally probable. The limit shape for this process under the scaling an = n
is                              √     √
                                  x + y = 61/4 .
See Figure 4 for the result of a simulation of this process. Eriksson and
Sjöstrand also introduce death steps analogous to birth steps where the
square at a randomly chosen outer corner is removed (see Figure 3.) They
study birth-and-death processes consisting of alternating births and deaths of
squares so that at the end of each birth-and-death period the Young diagram
has a fixed size n. A very important model in mathematical population

                                        6
                       y
                 2.5




                  2




                 1.5




                  1




                 0.5




                  0                                            x
                       0   0.5     1       1.5    2      2.5


Figure 4: The result of a simulation of 10,000 steps of Rost’s model under
                √                                         √     √
the scaling an = n. The smooth curve is the limit shape x + y = 61/4 .


genetics is the so-called Moran model with infinitely many alleles [11] which
they also formulate as a birth-and-death process on Young diagrams.

2     About paper I
2.1    Bulgarian solitaire
Section 1.4 considered processes where each step deals with the birth or
death of a single square. These single-square processes can be extended
to multi-square processes where each step comprises the birth of multi-
ple squares (a multi-square birth process), possibly followed by the death
of multiple squares (a multi-square birth-and-death process). For instance,
Jockusch, Propp and Shor [17] studied the birth process where, in each
step, each inner corner is filled with a fixed probability p (independently of
the other inner corners), and found the limit shape to be a quarter-ellipse (a
quarter circle when p = 1/2). Similarly, the so called Bulgarian solitaire can
be interpreted as a deterministic birth-and-death process with multi-square
steps.
    The game of Bulgarian solitaire is played with a deck of n identical cards
divided arbitrarily into several piles. A move consists of picking a card from


                                       7
each pile and letting these cards form a new pile. This move is repeated
over and over again. For information about the earlier history of the game
(including its name1 ) and a summary of subsequent research, see reviews by
Hopkins [14] and Drensky [8].
    Let n be the number of cards and let us represent a configuration of cards
by an integer partition of n (so that part sizes in a partition correspond
to pile sizes in a card configuration). This way, Bulgarian solitaire is a
simple dynamical system on P(n). Using this representation, it can be
formulated in terms of Young diagrams (drawn such that column heights
represent partition parts) as follows: In each step, remove the longest row
(corresponding to picking one card from each pile) and reinsert the same
number of squares as a new column (letting the picked cards form a new
pile). The new column should be inserted such that the result is a valid
Young diagram. This can be accomplished by inserting the new column to
the left and then left-shifting all cards. See Figure 5 (and on the cover of
this thesis) for an example.



                                 →                           →



Figure 5: A move in Bulgarian solitaire from λ = (5, 2, 2) ∈ P(9): The
bottom layer is picked to form a new pile with three cards and the cards are
then left-shifted.

    A remarkable fact about Bulgarian solitaire, which indeed sparked the
initial interest in it, is that when played with a triangular number of cards
n = 1 + 2 + · · · + k for some positive integer k, the solitaire will eventu-
ally reach the stable configuration (k, k − 1, . . . , 1), starting from any initial
configuration. This has been known since the 1980s [7, 29]. Brandt [7]
conjectured that the maximal number of moves necessary to reach that con-
figuration is k 2 − k. This was later proved by Igusa [16] and Etienne [10],
apparently independently at about the same time. (Although Etienne’s
proof was published much later, his paper is noted as having been received
in 1984.) In 1998, Griggs and Ho [13] found new simpler proofs of these
facts.
    1
      Firstly, because the player only follows rules mechanically, and do not choose between
different possible courses of action, Bulgarian solitaire is not really a “solitaire” in the sense
most people mean the word. Secondly, as it turns out, nor is it particularly Bulgarian!


                                                8
    Let B be the operation on P(n) corresponding to a move in Bulgarian
solitaire. For example, the move depicted in Figure 5 can be represented as
B((5, 2, 2)) = (4, 3, 1, 1). The game graph (or state diagram) of Bulgarian
solitaire is a directed graph whose nodes are P(n) and where there is an
edge from λ to λ0 if B(λ) = λ0 . For example, the game graph for n = 6 is
shown in Figure 6.


                                    (3,2,1)


                                     (4,2)


                       (3,1,1,1)                     (5,1)


                       (2,2,2)     (2,1,1,1,1)                   (6)


                        (3,3)                                (1,1,1,1,1,1)


                       (4,1,1)


                       (2,2,1,1)


          Figure 6: Bulgarian solitaire game graph for n = τ3 = 6.

    For any positive integer k, let τk = k(k + 1)/2 be the kth triangular
number. Let us also denote the staircase partition (k, k −1, . . . , 2, 1) ∈ P(τk )
by ∆k . Many results on Bulgarian solitaire can be formulated in terms of
the game graph. For example, the mentioned results of Brandt, Igusa and
Etienne for n = τk means that the game graph is a tree (which we will call
game tree) of maximal height k 2 − k and with a loop at the root node ∆k ,
which we can see in the game tree for the triangular number n = 6 (k = 3)
in Figure 6.
    For any number of cards, it is easy to realize that Bulgarian solitaire
must eventually return to an already visited configuration, since P(n) is
finite. Thus, the game graph must have a cycle. As we have seen, for
triangular n = τk , there is only one cycle and it has length one (the loop
at ∆k ), but for general n several cycles of different lengths may occur. The
partitions in these cycles are “almost” staircase shaped in the sense that

                                                 9
they can all be constructed by starting with some staircase shape ∆k and
adding at most one card to each pile, and possibly adding one more pile of
size 1 [1, 4, 10, 13]. After downscaling, the deviations from the staircase
partition tends to zero, so we may say that Bulgarian solitaire has a limit
shape that is a straight line.
    The smallest game graph with multiple cycles occurs at n = 8, where
there are two cycles. This game graph therefore has two connected com-
ponents. It is shown in Figure 7, where we see that the two cycles have
lengths four and two. The number of cycles and their lengths are counted
                                                                  (3, 2, 2, 1)            (4, 2, 1, 1)




                     (3, 3, 1, 1)                                  (3, 3, 2)               (4, 3, 1)




                      (4, 2, 2)                              (4, 4)                        (5, 2, 1)




                       (5, 3)                             (5, 1, 1, 1)           (3, 2, 1, 1, 1)    (6, 2)




            (4, 1, 1, 1, 1)   (6, 1, 1)                  (2, 2, 2, 1, 1)               (3, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)    (7, 1)




      (2, 2, 2, 2)                  (2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1)                                       (2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)     (8)




                                                                                                             (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)


                 Figure 7: Bulgarian solitaire game graph for n = 8.

in [7]. Hopkins [15] enumerates the partitions with no preimage under B,
called Garden of Eden Partitions. These are the partitions with indegree
zero in the game graph (i.e. the leaves in the game tree for triangular n). For
example, in Figure 6 we see that the Garden of Eden partitions for n = 6
are (2, 2, 1, 1), (2, 1, 1, 1, 1) and (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1), and in Figure 7 for n = 8 we
find seven Garden of Eden partitions.
    Let D(n) be the maximal number of moves required to reach a cycle (the
longest preperoid length) in Bulgarian solitaire with n cards. We saw earlier
that D(τk ) = k 2 − k. Igusa [16] and Etienne [10] proved that D(n) ≤ k 2 − k
whenever n ≤ 1+2+· · ·+k with equality for n = 1+2+· · ·+k. Griggs and Ho

                                                                 10
[13] improved this bound to D(n) ≤ k 2 − 2k − 1 whenever n ≤ 1 + 2 + · · · + k
with k ≥ 4, and present a lower bound which they conjecture to be the
actual value. For example, from Figure 7 we see that D(8) = 5 because of
the path (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1) → (8) → (7, 1) → (6, 2) → (5, 2, 1) → (4, 3, 1).
    Paper I considers the case when n = τk is a triangular number, i.e., when
the game graph is a tree, rooted at the stable configuration ∆k . It addresses
the question What is the level size of the game tree at a given level ? In other
words; How many partitions are there with a given number of moves from
the stable configuration? In Figure 6, we see that the level sizes are 1, 1, 2,
3, 2, 1, and 1.

2.2    Motivation
For m ≥ 0 let B m be m consecutive repetitions of B. Also, for any k and
any λ ∈ P(τk ), let Dk (λ) be the number of moves necessary to reach ∆k
starting from λ, i.e., for any k ∈ P, define the function Dk : P(τk ) → N such
that
                      Dk (λ) = min{d ∈ N : B d (λ) = ∆k }.
We use the minimum in the definition of Dk since ∆k is a fixed point of B.
    Suppose the number of cards is n = τk and consider the configuration
λ := (k − 1, k − 1, k − 2, k − 3, . . . , 3, 2, 1, 1). In other words λ is the config-
uration obtained from ∆k by removing one card from the biggest pile and
forming one more pile of size 1 with that card. The configuration λ has the
maximal number of moves to the staircase partition ∆k — the number of
moves is exactly k 2 − k (see for example [10]).
    Consider instead the configuration λ̃ := (k + 1, k − 1, k − 2, k − 3, . . . , 3, 2)
obtained from ∆k by removing the second biggest pile (that of size k − 1)
and distributing these k − 1 cards to the remaining piles, one in each pile.
Starting from λ̃ only one single move is required to reach ∆k .
    Moreover, λ̃ is unique being one move away from ∆k ; the inverse image
Dk−1 (1) = {λ ∈ P(τk ) : Dk (λ) = 1} is the singleton λ̃ for any k. The
partition λ on the other hand is not unique being k 2 − k moves away from
∆k ; for example, the value of |Dk−1 (k 2 − k)| is 3, 16, 65, 293, and 1267 for
k = 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8, respectively.
    The above observation motivated the investigation of |Dk−1 (d)| for all d
between 1 and k 2 − k. In other words, given any positive integer d ≤ k 2 − k,
how many partitions are there in P(τk ) with d moves to ∆k ? Or, in terms
of the Bulgarian solitaire game tree, what are its level sizes?




                                          11
2.3    Result
The values of |Dk−1 (d)| in Table 1 were found programmatically. They sug-

         krd      1   2   3     4     5        6     7      8        9     10
          1
          2       1   1
          3       1   2   3     2     1      1
          4       1   3   5     5     3      4       4      4       3       3
          5       1   3   7    12    12      7       8      8       7       6
          6       1   3   8    17    26     26      18     20      24      20
          7       1   3   8    20    41     59      55     40      48      58
          8       1   3   8    21    50     96     132    121      92     112
          9       1   3   8    21    54    124     225    293     265     213
          10      1   3   8    21    55    138     303    523     652     581
          11      1   3   8    21    55    143     350    735    1207    1448
          12      1   3   8    21    55    144     370    879    1768    2773
          13      1   3   8    21    55    144     376    952    2190    4220
          14      1   3   8    21    55    144     377    979    2433    5413
          15      1   3   8    21    55    144     377    986    2540    6177
          16      1   3   8    21    55    144     377    987    2575    6561

                          Table 1: Values of |Dk−1 (d)|

gest that, as k grows,
                      (|Dk−1 (1)|, |Dk−1 (2)|, |Dk−1 (3)|, . . . )
converges to a sequence starting with (1, 3, 8, 21, 55, 144, 377), which equals
the bisection (F2 , F4 , F6 , F8 , F10 , F12 , F14 ) of the famous Fibonacci sequence
(F0 = 0, F1 = 1, F2 = 1, F3 = 2, F4 = 3, . . . ). A more careful investigation
of Table 1 suggests that
                         
                         F2d
                                                for 1 ≤ d ≤ bk/2c,
             −1
          |Dk (d)| = F2d − 1                     for d = bk/2c + 1, odd k,        (3)
                         
                           F2d − 1 − k/2 for d = bk/2c + 1, even k.
                         

This is indeed so, which is one of the results in paper I. This is proved
by introducing a quasi-infinite Bulgarian solitaire, obtained by fixing d and
letting k → ∞, and identifying recursive properties of the quasi-infinite
game tree.
    Thus, when n = k(k + 1)/2, for 1 ≤ d ≤ bk/2c the number of partitions
with d moves to the staircase partition is the Fibonacci number F2d .

                                          12
2.4    Future research
Note that (3) determines the value of |Dk−1 (d)| only for 1 ≤ d ≤ dk/2e+1. A
natural question for future research is therefore the enumeration of |Dk−1 (d)|
for all possible d, i.e., for 1 ≤ d ≤ k 2 − k.
    As mentioned in Section 2.1, when the number of cards n is not triangu-
lar, the game graph has one cycle per connected component and the game
eventually reaches a cycle of partitions. Note that the fixed point parti-
tion for triangular n also constitutes a cycle (of length one). The question
addressed in paper I can therefore be extended to the case when n is non-
triangular. In other words, in Bulgarian solitaire with any number of cards,
how many partitions are there with a given number of steps to a partition
in a cycle?

3     About paper II
3.1    σ-Bulgarian solitaire
Many variants of Bulgarian solitaire have been suggested in the literature.
See [8] for an extensive survey.
    In 2016, Olson [19] presented a generalization of Bulgarian solitaire which
we call σ-Bulgarian solitaire, in which multiple cards may be picked from
a single pile. Specifically, the number of cards to pick from a pile is some
function σ : Z+ → N of the pile size, such that you pick σ(h) ≤ h cards
from a pile of size h. The case σ(h) = 1 for all h reduces to the ordinary
Bulgarian solitaire.
    Just like the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire, the σ-Bulgarian solitaire is
a deterministic process on a finite space, so cycles must necessarily occur.
Olson gives bounds on maximum cycle lengths and conditions associated
with the occurrence of isolated cycles.
    When a σ-Bulgarian solitaire has a fixed-point (i.e. a cycle of length one)
we call the fixed-point partition a stable configuration. Generally, partitions
in a cycle (of any length) are called recurrent configurations.
    Let us call σ well-behaved if
    1. σ(1) = 1,
    2. σ(h) is a non-decreasing function,
    3. σ̄(h) := h − σ(h) is a non-decreasing function.
The first condition says that from a pile with just a single card, you pick
that card. The second condition says that you never pick fewer cards from
a larger pile than from a smaller pile. The third condition says that the

                                      13
number of unpicked cards are never fewer in the larger pile than in a smaller
pile.
    Paper II considers σ-Bulgarian solitaires for well-behaved σ. Note that
the function σ(h) = 1 for all h that yields the ordinary solitaire is well-
behaved.

3.2      Results for well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire
The σ-Bulgarian solitaire is a wide generalization of the ordinary solitaire
and it produces behaviour that deviates significantly from the original ver-
sion. However, for well-behaved σ it turns out that a number of properties
that are well-known to hold for ordinary Bulgarian solitaire generalize to
well-behaved σ-solitaire, namely the following.

      • The dominance property. If a configuration λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . ) is dom-
        inated by another configuration κ = (κ1 , κ2 , . . . ), in the sense that
        λi ≤ κi for all i, then this dominance relation is preserved as the
        solitaire is played in parallel from the two configurations.

      • A geometric interpretation. Recall the geometric interpretation of
        a move of ordinary Bulgarian solitaire depicted in Figure 5, where
        the bottom layer is picked in each move. When generalizing to well-
        behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire, certain layers (determined from σ) are
        picked.

      • Stable configurations are unique for any n for which a stable configu-
        ration exists. To illustrate, an example of σ that is not well-behaved
        is σ(1) = σ(3) = σ(5) = 1, σ(2) = 2, σ(4) = 3 for n = 5. With this
        choice of σ, both (3, 2) and (4, 1) are stable configurations. This can-
        not happen if we impose the well-behaved criterion on σ. The game
        graph for this σ-Bulgarian solitaire is shown in Figure 8.

      • Stable configurations are convex. Define a configuration λ as convex
        if λi − λi+1 ≥ λi+1 − λi+2 for all i ≥ 1. Then it holds that a con-
        figuration λ is convex if and only if it is a stable configuration of a
        well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire. In the ordinary solitaire, the only
        stable configuration is the staircase partition, which clearly is convex
        (with equality in the definition).

   In order to study asymptotics as n → ∞, paper II considers a sequence of
well-behaved σn , for n = 1, 2, . . . . Recall from Section 2.1 that the ordinary
Bulgarian solitaire has a stable configuration if and only if the total number

                                        14
                                                      (4, 1)
                         (3, 2)

                                                        (5)
                        (3, 1, 1)

                                    (1, 1, 1, 1, 1) (2, 1, 1, 1)   (2, 2, 1)


   Figure 8: Game graph for a non-well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire.

of cards n in the deck is a triangular number. Thus, the Young diagrams
of stable configurations are staircase shaped and hence the limit shape as
n → ∞ is a triangle. When generalizing from ordinary Bulgarian solitaire
to well-behaved σn -Bulgarian solitaire, the limit shapes that arise will not
necessarily be triangular. In fact, in Theorem 3 we prove that any convex
shape (with some properties) can be obtained as the limit shape of a suitably
chosen family of well-behaved σn , for n = 1, 2, . . . :
Theorem 3. Let φ : (0, ∞) → R≥0 be a function and let a1 , a2 , . . . → ∞
be any (positive) scaling factors such that a2n /n converges to some c ≥ 0 as
n → ∞. Then the following are equivalent.
 (a) There is a sequence of well-behaved σn , n = 1, 2, . . . , such that φ is a
     stable-limit shape of (σn ) under the scaling (an ).
                         R∞
 (b) φ is convex with 0 φ(x) dx ≤ 1, and if c > 0 the right derivative
     φ0R (x) is an integer multiple of c for any x > 0.
    One property of ordinary Bulgarian solitaire that does not generalize
to well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire is that, if a stable configuration exists,
the game eventually reaches it. As we have seen, ordinary Bulgarian solitaire
with a triangular number of cards always reaches the stable staircase parti-
tion. But the well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire defined by σ(h) = d3h/10e
on n = 11 cards has the stable configuration (5, 3, 2, 1) as well as the cycle

        (6, 2, 2, 1) 7→ (5, 4, 1, 1) 7→ (6, 3, 2) 7→ (4, 4, 2, 1) 7→ (6, 2, 2, 1).

However, each of these recurrent configurations deviate from the stable con-
figuration (5, 3, 2, 1) with at most one card in each pile. Recall from Sec-
tion 2.1 that the recurrent configurations in ordinary Bulgarian solitaire
(with a non-triangular number of cards) deviate with at most one card per
pile from a stable configuration. This led us to conclude that the limit shape

                                                15
for ordinary Bulgarian solitaire is a straight line, as the deviations tend to
zero as n tends to infinity.
    For well-behaved Bulgarian solitaire, we believe that it holds in general
that recurrent configurations’ deviations also tend to zero as n tends to
infinity, and that therefore the limit shape for recurrent configurations is
the same as that for stable configurations. It is therefore left as a conjecture
that the same limit shape holds for recurrent configurations, as for stable
configurations:
Conjecture 1. If φ is a limit shape of the stable configurations of a sequence
of well-behaved σn , then φ is also a limit shape of the recurrent configura-
tions.

3.3   qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire
In order to calculate explicit limit shapes we make a canonical choice of a
well-behaved σ, namely σ(h) = dqhe for q ∈ (0, 1]. (It should be obvious
that this function satisfies the conditions for being well-behaved; see the
definition in Section 3.1.) In words, this form of σ defines a solitaire in
which from each pile we pick a number of cards given by the proportion q
of the pile size, rounded upward to the nearest integer. We will refer to this
solitaire as q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire.
    We may let the choice of q depend on n, in which case we write qn . Note
that for qn ≤ 1/n only one card is picked in any pile. Thus by choosing
qn ≤ 1/n we obtain ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.

3.4   Results for qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire
In paper II, three different regimes for limit shapes of stable configurations
of qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire are identified. A move of q-proportion
Bulgarian solitaire involves rounding the number of picked cards in each pile
to an integer. The three regimes differ in how much impact this rounding
has on the result.
    First, in case nqn2 → 0 as n → ∞, the rounding effect dominates and
stable configurations have a triangular limit shape. This is a direct general-
ization of the limit shape result for the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.
    The second regime is when nqn2 → ∞, in which case the rounding effect
is negligible, and an exponential limit shape is obtained. With no round-
ing, pile sizes decrease geometrically with decay factor 1 − qn , which is the
intuition behind this result.



                                      16
    The borderline regime when nqn2 tends to a constant C yields an infinite
family of limit shapes (parameterized by C), which interpolate between the
triangular shape of the first regime and the exponential shape of the second
regime. See Figure 9.




      (a)                     (b)




                    (c)

Figure 9: The three cases of limit shapes for stable configurations of qn -
proportion Bulgarian solitaire: (a) qn2 n → 0 (triangular), (b) qn2 n → ∞
(exponential), and (c) qn2 n tends to a positive constant (a number of linear
sections, here illustrated for three sections).

   Although Conjecture 1 is not proved for general well-behaved σ-solitaire,
we can prove the conjecture in the special cases of the two main regimes of qn -
proportion solitaire. In other words, we also prove in paper II that recurrent
configurations of qn -proportion solitaire have the same limit shape as stable
configurations in the cases qn2 n → 0 and qn2 n → ∞.

3.5     Future research
A proof on Conjecture 1 remains to be found. In paper II we show that for
well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire, a configuration’s total deviation from a
stable configuration will often decrease but never increase during play, which
is a first step towards a proof.

4      About paper III
4.1     p-random q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire
Popov [20] considered a random version of the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire
defined by a probability p ∈ (0, 1], such that one card from each pile is
picked with probability p, independently of other piles. For p = 1 we obtain
the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.

                                      17
     In the spirit of Popov’s p-random version of ordinary Bulgarian solitaire,
paper III examines a pn -random version of the qn -proportion Bulgarian soli-
taire, in which the proportion qn (rounded upward) of cards in a pile are
only candidates to be picked, each of which is picked only with probability
pn , independently of all other candidate cards. This process is denoted by
B(n, pn , qn ). Note that in the special case of a fixed p and for qn ≤ 1/n,
this process is equivalent to Popov’s p-random Bulgarian solitaire.
     The pn -random qn -proportion solitaire B(n, pn , qn ) (with pn , qn ∈ (0, 1])
can be regarded as a Markov chain on the finite state-space P(n). Let us
denote the sequence of visited states by (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . ). In the truly random
case of pn < 1, it is straightforward to verify that this Markov chain is
aperiodic and irreducible. It is well-known that an aperiodic and irreducible
Markov chain on a finite state-space has a unique stationary distribution π
and that starting from any initial state the distribution of the ith state λ(i)
converges to π as i tends to infinity. We denote by πn,pn ,qn the stationary
measure of the Markov chain (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . ) on P(n) given by B(n, pn , qn )
for pn < 1. When we refer to a limit shape of the process B(n, pn , qn )
for pn < 1 as n grows to infinity, we shall mean the limit shape of the
stationary measure πn,pn ,qn . The intuitive sense of this concept is that when
the solitaire is played on a sufficiently large number of cards for sufficiently
long the configuration will almost surely be very close to the limit shape after
suitable downscaling.

4.2    Results
Recall from Section 3.4 the qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire, where the
limit shape is triangular when qn2 n → 0, exponential when qn2 n → ∞ and an
interpolation between the two when qn2 n → C > 0.
    The pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire seems to share this
property of three regimes of limit shapes.
    In the pn -random qn -proportion solitaire, the number of candidate cards
in a pile is the proportion qn of the pile size rounded upwards to the nearest
integer. As in the nonrandom version, the three regimes differ in how much
impact this rounding has on the result. It turns out that when pn qn2 n → ∞,
the effect of the rounding is negligible. With no rounding, expected pile sizes
decrease geometrically with decay factor 1 − qn , so we expect an exponential
limit shape.
    The focus in paper III is the proof of the exponential limit shape of
the pn -random qn -candidate Bulgarian solitaire, i.e. the case pn qn2 n → ∞ as
n → ∞. However, due to the employed proof technique we establish the


                                        18
stronger statement that the limit shape holds even without sorting the piles
of a configuration according to size to create a partition in P(n). We will
instead require the stronger condition pn qn2 n/log n → ∞ as n → ∞:
Theorem 1. For each positive integer n, pick qn and pn with 0 < pn , qn ≤ 1
and a (possibly random) initial configuration λ(0) ∈ P(n). Let (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . )
be the Markov chain on P(n) defined by B(n, pn , qn ), and denote its station-
ary measure by πn,pn ,qn . Suppose

                                      pn qn2 n
                   p n qn → 0   and            → ∞ as n → ∞.
                                       log n

Then πn,pn ,qn has the limit shape e−x under the scaling an = (pn qn )−1 .
    As we see, the scaling factor in Theorem 1 is (pn qn )−1 . It is therefore
natural to require pn qn → 0, since pn qn being bounded away from zero
would mean that (pn qn )−1 is bounded and hence cannot transform the jumpy
boundary diagrams into a smooth limit shape.
    The number of picked cards from the candidate cards in a pile is bino-
mially distributed, and so it is not surprising that the proof of Theorem 1
relies heavily on the use of Chernoff bounds.

4.3     Future research
We conjecture that Theorem 1 holds also when the condition npn qn2 /log n →
∞ is replaced by the weaker condition npn qn2 → ∞, as our simulations
suggest that if we have npn qn2 → ∞ but not npn qn2 /log n → ∞, limit shapes
are still attained.
    Also, paper III focuses on the exponential regime pn qn2 n → ∞. We also
conjecture that the limit shapes in the pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian
solitaire are the same as in the deterministic q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire
developed in paper II. Specifically, we conjecture the following.

      • If pn qn2 n → 0 as n → ∞, the limit shape of the pn -random qn -
        proportion Bulgarian solitaire is triangular.

      • If pn qn2 n → C as n → ∞ for some constant C > 0, the limit shape of
        the pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire is a piecewise linear
        shape that depends on the value of C.

Proofs of the above conjectures remain to be found.



                                         19
5     About paper IV
5.1    Posets
I borrow the following definition from Stanley [26]: A partially ordered set
(or poset for short) is a set P together with a binary relation denoted ≤
satisfying the following three axioms:

    1. For all t ∈ P , t ≤ t (reflexivity).
    2. If s ≤ t and t ≤ s, then s = t (antisymmetry).
    3. If s ≤ t and t ≤ u, then s ≤ u (transitivity).

We use the obvious notation s < t to mean s ≤ t and s 6= t.
    If s, t ∈ P then we say that t covers s (or s is covered by t), denoted
s l t or t m s, if s < t but there is no u with s < u < t.
    Just like Young diagrams are convenient ways of representing integer
partitions graphically, there is a convenient way of representing posets. The
Hasse diagram of a poset P is the graph whose vertices are the elements of
P , and whose edges are the cover relations and such that if s < t then t is
drawn “above” s (i.e., with a higher vertical coordinate).
    The theory of posets plays an important role in enumerative combina-
torics. To get some feeling for their structure, let us consider an example.

Example 1. Let n ∈ N and [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}. We can make the set 2[n]
of all subsets of [n] into a poset Bn by defining S ≤ T in Bn if S ⊆ T as
sets. One says that Bn consists of the subsets of [n] “ordered by inclusion”.
The Hasse diagram of B4 can be seen in Figure 10.

    Let I ⊆ Z be a (possibly infinite) interval of the integers. An I-graded
poset Ω is a countable (or finite) poset together with a surjective map ρ : Ω →
I, called the rank function, such that

   • u < v implies ρ(u) < ρ(v), and
   • u l v implies ρ(v) = ρ(u) + 1.

We can partition Ω = i∈I Ωi into its level sets Ωi = ρ−1 (i).
                      S
   Clearly, the poset Bn in Example 1 is {0, 1, . . . , n}-graded with rank
function ρ being the set cardinality ρ(u) = |u|.

5.2    Young’s lattice and Hasse walks
One certain class of partially ordered sets are called lattices. See for example
[26] for a formal definition.

                                      20
                                     {1, 2, 3, 4}




                  {1, 2, 3}     {1, 2, 4}        {1, 3, 4}   {2, 3, 4}




     {1, 2}        {1, 3}        {1, 4}           {2, 3}      {2, 4}      {3, 4}




                    {1}           {2}              {3}         {4}




                                            ∅

                  Figure 10: Hasse diagram of the poset B4 .


    Young’s lattice Y is a poset formed by all integer partitions ordered
by inclusion of their Young diagrams. For any integer partition λ, de-
fine λi = 0 for i > N (λ). Let λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λN (λ) , 0, 0, . . . ) and µ =
(µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µN (µ) , 0, 0, . . . ) be two integer partitions. Then λ ≤ µ in Y if
λi ≤ µi for any i, in other words, the Young diagram of λ fits inside that of
µ. The first four levels of Young’s lattice can be seen in Figure 11. Clearly,
Y is a Z+ -graded poset with level sets Ωi = P(i), i ∈ Z+ .
    In this ordering, λ l µ if and only if µ can be obtained from λ by adding
a square to any of its inner corners.
    As mentioned in Section 1.4, the paper [9] studies stochastic processes on
Young diagrams where each step entails either the birth of a square (a birth
process) or the combined birth of one square and the death of another (a
birth-and-death process). Births occur in inner corners and deaths in outer
corners. A Hasse walk is a walk along the edges in a Hasse diagram, in other
words, a walk along the covering relations in a poset [25, 26]. Therefore,
the processes considered in [9] can be regarded as random Hasse walks on
Young’s lattice Y. Walks that go steadily upwards in Y are birth processes
and those that alternately go up and down are birth-and-death processes.


                                            21
      Figure 11: Hasse diagram of the first four levels of Young’s lattice.


Paper IV develops a framework for such unidirected and alternatingly di-
rected random Hasse walks on general graded posets.

5.3     Motivation
The motivation behind paper IV is a conjecture in Eriksson and Sjöstrand’s
paper [9]. We will now describe the birth step, called row(µ), and the death
step, called derow, involved in this conjecture. Consider a current Young
diagram λ.

      • The action of the death step derow is defined by choosing a non-
        empty row i uniformly at random and removing the corresponding
        outer corner.

      • The action of the birth step row(µ) is defined as follows: With prob-
        ability µ create a new row of length 1. Otherwise make a uniformly
        random choice of a row and insert a new square at the corresponding
        inner corner.

The process induced by the birth step row(µ) will also be referred to as
row(µ). The birth-and-death process with alternating row(µ)-births and
derow-deaths will be referred to as derow-row(µ).
    Eriksson and Sjöstrand established that, for any fixed n and µn , the
limit shape for the distribution κ(n) on P(n) induced by starting with a
single square and running n − 1 steps of row(µn ) is y = e−x under the
scaling an = 1/µn (where µn must fulfill some asymptotic properties as
n → ∞).

                                       22
   As for derow-row(µ), they proved explicit formulas for the station-
ary distributions πn and πn−1 on P(n) and P(n − 1), respectively, when
derow-row(µ) toggles between P(n) and P(n − 1). They conjectured that
these stationary distributions have the same limit shape y = e−x as for
row(µ). This conjecture inspired to compare the distributions κ(n) and πn
programmatically. The simulations suggested that κ(n) actually coincides
with πn for any n. If a proof of this were found, it would solve the limit
shape conjecture for κ(n) .
   This observation motivated not only the efforts to find a proof for this,
but also the investigation of the conditions under which this holds in general
on Y. In other words,

 Q1. When does the distribution induced by a birth process on Y coincide
     with the corresponding stationary distribution of a birth-and-death pro-
     cess?

5.4   Results
Although question Q1 is asked for processes on Young’s lattice, paper IV
develops a framework for general discrete-time Markov chains on graded
posets where the transitions are taken along the covering relations in the
poset. The answer to Q1 then follows by applying this framework to the
case when the poset is Young’s lattice. One way of formulating this answer
is

 A1. When the stationary distribution on level n for the birth-and-death
     process when toggling between levels n and n − 1 coincides with the
     stationary distribution on level n when toggling between levels n and
     n + 1, for each n.

    The one-directed Markov chains considered in paper IV are called up
chains (a generalization of birth processes on Young’s lattice) or down
chains. The alternatingly directed Markov chains that toggle between two
adjacent rank levels in the poset are called up-and-down chains (a general-
ization of birth-and-death processes on Young’s lattice).
    A birth step is called an up rule and a death step is called a down rule
on general posets. Paper IV also settles the questions whether the reverse
of an up chain is a down chain for some down rule and whether there exists
an up or down chain at all if the rank function is not bounded.




                                     23
    5.5   Future research
    Apart from the directions for future research outlined in Section 6 (Discus-
    sion) in paper IV, a possible application of this framework is the extension
    of the processes in [9] from integer partitions to integer compositions.
        A composition of n is a nonempty sequence α = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αN ) of
                                                          PN (α)
    positive integers, of length N = N (α), satisfying i=1 αi = n. For any
    positive integer n, let Cn = {compositions of n} and C = C1 ∪ C2 ∪ · · · .
        One can turn C into a partially ordered set by introducing a cover rela-
    tion l and obtaining the partial order by transitive closure of this covering
    relation. A number of such relations on C have been studied in the past.
    Bergeron, Bousquet-Mélou and Dulucq [5] were the first to study C as a
    poset. They use the cover relation that α l β if β is obtained either by
    adding 1 to a part of α, or by adding a part of size 1 to α. The result-
    ing poset is usually denoted BBD. (For other partial orders on C, see for
    example [6, 23, 24].)
        Young diagrams of integer partitions can be extended to composition dia-
    grams where the composition diagram of α are left-justified rows of squares
    such that the ith row from the bottom has length αi . For example, the
    composition diagram for (1, 4, 2, 3) is




        The birth and death steps on Young diagrams studied in [9] may be
    extended to integer compositions such that α l β in BBD if β can be
    reached from α by a birth step and α can be reached from β by a death
    step. For example, we may define the death step derow and the birth step
    row(µ) in the refined world of composition diagrams as follows. Assume a
    current composition diagram α = (α1 , . . . , αN (α) ).
derow: Choose a non-empty row i uniformly at random, and remove the right-
       most square in that row. If the chosen row has only one square (i.e. if
       αi = 1), contract that row.
row(µ): With probability µ create a new row of length 1 and insert this in any
        of the available N (α) + 1 positions (i.e. above any of the current N (α)
                                                                        1
        rows or before the first row), each with equal probability N (α)+1  .
          Otherwise (i.e. with probability 1−µ) make a uniformly random choice
          of a row i among the N (α) non-empty rows and insert a new square
          at the end of that row.


                                         24
References
 [1] E. Akin and M. Davis, Bulgarian solitaire, The American Mathematical
     Monthly 92 (1985), no. 4, pp. 237–250.

 [2] G.E. Andrews, The theory of partitions, no. 2, Cambridge university
     press, 1998.

 [3] G.E. Andrews and K. Eriksson, Integer partitions, Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press, 2004.

 [4] H.J. Bentz, Proof of the Bulgarian solitaire conjectures, Ars Combin.
     23 (1987), 151–170.

 [5] F. Bergeron, M. Bousquet-Mélou, and S. Dulucq, Standard paths
     in the composition poset, Annales des sciences mathématiques du
     Québec, vol. 19, Université du Québec à Montréal, Département de
     mathématiques et informatique, 1995, pp. 139–151.

 [6] A. Björner and R.P. Stanley, An analogue of Young’s lattice for com-
     positions, arXiv preprint math.CO/0508043 (2005).

 [7] J. Brandt, Cycles of partitions, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 85 (1982),
     no. 3, pp. 483–486.

 [8] V. Drensky, The Bulgarian solitaire and the mathematics around it,
     Math. and Education in Math., Proc. of the 44-th Spring Conf. of
     the Union of Bulgar. Mathematicians, SOK-Kamchia, April 2–6, 2015
     (2015), 79–91.

 [9] K. Eriksson and J. Sjöstrand, Limiting shapes of birth-and-death pro-
     cesses on Young diagrams, Adv. in Appl. Math. 48 (2012), no. 4, 575
     – 602.

[10] G. Etienne, Tableaux de Young et solitaire bulgare, J. Combin. Theory
     Ser. A 58 (1991), no. 2, 181–197.

[11] W.J. Ewens, Mathematical population genetics 1: theoretical introduc-
     tion, vol. 27, Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

[12] C. Greene, A. Nijenhuis, and H.S. Wilf, Another probabilistic method in
     the theory of young tableaux, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series
     A 37 (1984), no. 2, 127 – 135.


                                    25
[13] J.R. Griggs and C.C. Ho, The cycling of partitions and compositions
     under repeated shifts, Adv. in Appl. Math. 21 (1998), no. 2, 205–227.
[14] B. Hopkins, 30 years of Bulgarian solitaire, College Math. J. 43 (2012),
     no. 2, 136–141.
[15] B. Hopkins and J.A. Sellers, Exact enumeration of Garden of Eden
     partitions, Integers 7 (2007), no. 2, A19.
[16] K. Igusa, Solution of the Bulgarian solitaire conjecture, Math. mag. 58
     (1985), no. 5, 259–271.
[17] W. Jockusch, J. Propp, and P. Shor, Random domino tilings and the
     arctic circle theorem, arXiv preprint math/9801068 (1998).
[18] B.F. Logan and L.A. Shepp, A variational problem for random young
     tableaux, Advances in mathematics 26 (1977), no. 2, 206–222.
[19] J.S. Olson, Variants of Bulgarian solitaire, Integers 16 (2016), A8.
[20] S. Popov, Random Bulgarian solitaire, Random Structures Algorithms
     27 (2005), no. 3, 310–330.
[21] H. Rost, Non-equilibrium behaviour of a many particle process: Den-
     sity profile and local equilibria, Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheo-
     rie und Verwandte Gebiete 58 (1981), no. 1, 41–53.
[22] T. Seppäläinen, Hydrodynamic scaling, convex duality, and asymptotic
     shapes of growth models, (1996).
[23] J. Snellman, A poset classifying non-commutative term orders, Discrete
     Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science 301 (2001), 314.
[24]         , Saturated chains in composition posets, arXiv preprint
       math/0505262 (2005).
[25] R.P. Stanley, Differential posets, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 1 (1988), no. 4,
     919–961.
[26]         , Enumerative combinatorics, vol. 1, Wadsworth                  and
       Brooks/Cole, Pacific Grove, CA, 1986; second printing, 1996.
[27] M. Szalay and P. Turán, On some problems of the statistical theory of
     partitions with application to characters of the symmetric group. i, Acta
     Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 29 (1977), no. 3-4,
     361–379.

                                       26
[28] H.N.V. Temperley, Statistical mechanics and the partition of numbers.
     ii. the form of crystal surfaces, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc, vol. 48,
     Cambridge Univ Press, 1952, pp. 683–697.

[29] N.B. Vassilev, V.L. Gutenmaher, J.M. Rabbot, and A.L. Toom, Mathe-
     matical olympiads by mail, 2nd ed., Ph.D. thesis, Nauka, Moscow, 1986.

[30] A. Vershik, Statistical mechanics of combinatorial partitions, and their
     limit shapes, Funct. Anal. Appl. 30 (1996), no. 2, 90–105.

[31] A. Vershik and S. Kerov, Asymptotics of the Plancherel measure of the
     symmetric group and the limiting form of young tables, Soviet Math.
     Dokl., vol. 18, 1977, p. 38.

[32]          , Asymptotic of the largest and the typical dimensions of irre-
       ducible representations of a symmetric group, Funct. Anal. Appl. 19
       (1985), no. 1, 21–31 (English).

[33] A. Vershik, Asymptotic combinatorics and algebraic analysis, pp. 1384–
     1394, Birkhäuser Basel, Basel, 1995.

[34] Y. Yakubovich, Ergodicity of multiplicative statistics, J. Combin. The-
     ory, Series A 119 (2012), no. 6, 1250–1279.




                                      27
Paper I
       LEVEL SIZES OF THE BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE GAME TREE

                                HENRIK ERIKSSON AND MARKUS JONSSON


        Abstract. Bulgarian solitaire is a dynamical system on integer partitions of n which con-
        verges to a unique fixed point if n = 1 + 2 + · · · + k is a triangular number. There are few
        results about the structure of the game tree, but when k tends to infinity the game tree itself
        converges to a structure that we are able to analyze. Its level sizes turns out to be a bisection
        of the Fibonacci numbers. The leaves in this tree structure are enumerated using Fibonacci
        numbers as well. We also demonstrate to which extent these results apply to the case when
        k is finite.




                                             1. Introduction
   The game of Bulgarian solitaire works as follows: First divide a finite deck of n identical
cards into piles. A move consists in removing one card from each pile and forming a new pile.
This operation is repeated over and over. We pay attention only to how many piles there are
of each positive size, ignoring the locations of the piles. Thus, each position of the game is
an integer partition of n whose parts are the pile-sizes, and each move is an operation on the
set of partitions inducing a finite dynamical system. See for example [2, 4] for the fascinating
history of Bulgarian solitaire.
   In terms of Young diagrams of integer partitions, pile-sizes correspond to rows in the diagram
and the move is to delete the first column and add it as a new row.
               3
                                 5                                                   4
               3                                             5
                                 2                                                   3
               2           7→                    7→ · · · 7→ 3                  7→
                                 2                                                   2
               1                                             2
                                 1                                                   1
               1

               Figure 1. A sequence of positions converging to the fixed point.

The illustrating game for n = 10 in Figure 1 converges in twelve moves to the staircase shape
of the partition (4, 3, 2, 1), which is a fixed point. In the case when n = 1 + 2 + · · · + k is a
triangular number, all games will converge to the fixed point (k, k − 1, . . . , 1) (see for example
[1, 8]).
   Let P(n) be the set of integer partitions of n. Let B be the operation on P(n) such that
B(λ) is the partition resulting from a move of Bulgarian solitaire on λ. The game graph is
a directed graph where P(n) are the nodes and where there is an edge from λ ∈ P(n) to
λ0 ∈ P(n) if B(λ) = λ0 . When the game graph is a tree, we call it a game tree.
   For non-triangular n, the game has no fixed point. Instead the game graph has cycles, one
for each connected component, and the game always reaches some cycle [1]. The number of
cycles and their sizes are counted in [1]. The game graph analysis in [6] mainly characterizes
and enumerates partitions with no preimage under B (called Garden of Eden partitions) and
[5] investigates their relation to the cycles.
  Research supported in part by the Swedish Research Council, grant 2010-5565.

                                                                                                            1
   In this paper we will consider the case when n = 1 + 2 + · · · + k is a triangular number.
Since all games will converge to the staircase shaped fixed point, the game graph is a directed
tree whose leaves are the Garden of Eden partitions and whose root is the staircase partition.
The height of this tree is known [3] to be k(k − 1), but to our knowledge the level size of the
tree at a given level d has not been studied before. Paradoxically, the game tree’s being finite
is what makes further analysis difficult. We will show how a quasi-infinite version of the game,
obtained by fixing the level d and letting k → ∞, makes it possible to study the level sizes.

                                 2. Reversed Bulgarian solitaire
   By reversing all arrows in the directed game tree and labelling as below, we get reversed
Bulgarian solitaire, starting with the staircase partition. A move in the reversed game is the
following:
                           i
                           → : Delete row i. Add it as the leftmost column.
Such a move can be made if and only if the length of the deleted row is greater than or equal
to the height of the Young diagram after the deletion. In other words, if λ is a partition and
                                                    i
λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λN (λ) are its parts, the move λ → is only possible if λi ≥ N (λ) − 1.
   The reversed game tree for k = 4 (n = 10) is shown in Figure 2. Recall that edge labels
indicate which row is being played (i.e., which row is being deleted in the move)1. For reasons
of space, in Figure 2 we represent positions as horizontal vectors. In the following, we will
always represent positions as vertical vectors, so as to match the notion of Young diagram row
lengths in Figure 1. Deleting the first row in the staircase partition leads back to the staircase
                                                               1
partition, so in Figure 2 the subtree reached by an initial → move is identical to the whole
tree and the edge is a loop in disguise. However, we prefer to keep it a tree.
   The reverse of the game in Figure 1 may be written as
     h4i   h5i   h4i   h4i   h3i   h4i   h5i   h4i   h3i   h4i   h4i  h5i 3
     h3i 2 h3i 1 3 1 2 1 h3i 1 h4i 1 h3i 1 2 1 h3i 1 h3i 1 h4i 1 2 1 3
      2  → h2i →  1  →  2  → h3i → h2i →  1  →  2  →  2  → h3i →  1 → 2 → 2                               (2.1)
      1           1     2                 1     1     2           1    1  1
                  1           1                 1                         1

Numbers within the angle brackets hi are playable, that is, at least N (λ)−1, and we shall refer
to them as bracketed numbers. Clearly, the start vector representing the staircase partition
always has two bracketed numbers.
   In our example in Figure 1 we chose a Garden of Eden partition (3, 3, 2, 1, 1) as the starting
position. Recall from the introduction that the height of the game tree is k(k − 1) when the
number of cards n is triangular, n = 1 + 2 + · · · + k. Since the sequence in (2.1) has length
12 = 4 · 3, this sequence represents the tree height, in other words, λ is not only a Garden of
Eden partition but also has the maximum number of moves to the fixed point (and is therefore
at the bottommost level in the reversed game tree in Figure 2).
   Using the introduced bracket notation, the move rule may now be expressed as follows.
                       i
           Rule for → in reversed Bulgarian solitaire
               1. Delete the bracketed ith number p.
               2. Increase all remaining numbers by 1.                                                    (R1)
               3. Add trailing 1s as necessary to make the vector length equal to p.
               4. Bracket all numbers greater than or equal to p − 1.

   1If the length of a playable row is repeated in a partition, then playing any of these rows is represented by
playing the uppermost row of this length.

2
                                     LEVEL SIZES OF THE BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE GAME TREE
                                                                       4321

                                                         1                               2
                                               T                                                  532
                                                                                 1                                      3
                                                                                                       2
                                                         43111                                    631                                    64
                                                             1                                1            2                         1        2
                                                             4222                        421111            721                  511111        7111
                                                             1                                     1               2             1            1
                                                             3331                            3211111               82           22222 2221111
                                                             1                                                 1            2
                                                             442                                   31111111                 91
                                                   1                        3                                      1                     2
                                      5311                                       55               211111111                                   10
                                 1                 2                             1                                                            1
                         42211                         622                      61111                                                    1111111111
                         1                     1                 2               1
                         3322         331111                     73             222211
                         1                               1              2
                          433                   4111111                 811
                     1               2                                  1
                4411                     541                          22111111
                 1               1              2
                5221         52111             6211
                 1           1                  1
                33211        32221             322111


                                 Figure 2. Reversed game tree T for k = 4.


We will denote a sequence of played rows by [r1 , r2 , . . .] or simply [r1 r2 . . .]. Such a sequence
may also be referred to as a play sequence. Also, we will use exponents to mean repeated play
of a row number: rs = r, r, . . . , r. Thus, the play sequence in (2.1) is denoted [2, 111 ].
                        | {z }
                                     s times
  In our small example, the partitions in the game soon lost all similarity with the staircase
shape. Now we will investigate what happens as k grows. To this end, instead of writing down
the lengths of the rows, we will note the difference: row length minus original row length in
the staircase (where we append zeros as necessary to compute the difference).
  This is what the sequence (2.1) looks like in this difference notation:
    h0i   h1i   h0i h0i  h−1i  h0i   h1i   h0i  h−1i  h0i   h0i   h1i  −1
    h0i 2 h0i 1 0 1 −1 1 h0i 1 h1i 1 h0i 1 −1 1 h0i 1 h0i 1 h1i 1 −1 1 0
     0 → h0i → 1 → 0 → h1i → h0i → −1 → 0 → 0 → h1i → −1 → 0 → 0
     0           0   1                0     0     1          0     0    0
          −1    −1         0   −1                     −1                1
                                            1

To see more clearly what happens as k grows, below follows an example for a larger k.


                                                                                                                                                      3
Example 2.1. For k = 8 (n = 36), the play sequence [2, 16 ] yields
                          h0i   h1i   h0i h0i h0i  h0i h0i h0i
                          h0i   h0i    0  h0i h0i  h0i h0i −1
                           0    h0i    0   0   0    0  −1   0
                           0 →2 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 −1 1 0 1 1
                           0     0
                                    → 0 → 0 → −1 → 0 → 1 → 0
                           0     0     0  −1   0    1   0   0
                           0     0    −1   0   1    0   0   0
                           0    −1     0   1   0    0   0   0
                                       1

   Each zero travel upwards, one step in each move, until it expires (either is deleted or is
transformed into a 1). As we will see, it takes at least k/2 moves for the bottom zero in the
start vector to expire, and neither the −1 below it or the numbers further down have any
influence on the game so far (not being bracketed). Therefore, all game trees for k ≥ 8 are
identical up to and including level four. This observation brings us to introduce a quasi-infinite
version of the game.


                      3. Quasi-infinite reversed Bulgarian solitaire
   In quasi-infinite difference notation, the start vector should now be an infinite sequence
of zeros. However, we will write only two zeros and assume that there are infinitely many
invisible non-bracketed zeros below them. Now, we can write the game [21111 . . .] as
                                h0i 2 h1i 1 h0i 1 h0i 1 h0i 1
                                h0i → h0i → 0 → h0i → h0i → · · ·
                                      h0i

With this notation, the game looks very different. In quasi-infinite reversed Bulgarian solitaire
                     h0i
the start vector is h0i and the rules are a straightforward extension of the rules (R1) to quasi-
infinite difference notation.
                      i
           Rule for → in reversed quasi-infinite difference notation
               1. Delete the bracketed ith number.
               2. Increase all numbers above it by 1 and make them bracketed.
               3. Bracket the new ith number (if there is one) if it differs at most 1           (R2)
                  from the old one.
               4. If a zero was played, add zeros at the end so that there are two,
                  and make them bracketed.
    In the quasi-infinite version, the game [2345] is represented as
                                                        h3i   h4i
                                    h0i     h1i   h2i
                                                        h2i   h3i
                                    h0i     h0i   h1i
                                          2     3     4     5 h2i
                                          → h0i → h0i → h1i → h1i
                                                  h0i   h0i
                                                        h0i   h0i
                                                              h0i

Note that the vectors are always strictly decreasing down to the zeros. This property follows
by induction as it is invariant under the move rules.
Proposition 3.1. The quasi-infinite reversed Bulgarian solitaire has the following properties.
      (i) Once 1 is played, only 1 can be played (until the start vector is reached).
     (ii) For r ≥ 2, the play sequence [234 . . . r 1r ] leads to the start vector. Together with [1],
          these are the only play sequences with this property.

4
                                      LEVEL SIZES OF THE BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE GAME TREE
                                                                                                          1
Proof. (i): It follows from (R2) that the position vector following a → move either has no
                                                                            1
bracketed number (so it is a leaf), one bracketed number (so another → must be played to
reach the start vector) or is the start vector (in case a zero was played).
   (ii): Playing [234 . . . r], we reach
                                                                  hr−1i
                                                                  hr−2i
                                                                    ..
                                                                     .    ,
                                                                   h1i
                                                                   h0i
                                                                   h0i
and then [1r ] deletes the top number r times, yielding the start vector. From property (i) it
is clear that the start vector cannot be obtained in any other way.                         
Figure 3 shows what the quasi-infinite game tree looks like for the first three moves. As

                                                      h0i
                                                      h0i

                                     1                                   2

                                                                                      h1i
                          h0i                                                         h0i
                          h0i                                                         h0i

                     1          2                                   1                                 3
                                                                                      2
        h0i                             h1i                                                                             h2i
                                                                                      h2i
        h0i                             h0i           h0i                                                               h1i
                                                                                      h0i
                                        h0i            0                                                                h0i
   .   .. ..   .
                                                                                      h0i
                                                                                                                        h0i
                                     . . .. . .
                                    . . .         1
                                                                                  1   2     3                 1    2          3     4
                                                                                                                                        h3i
                                                       h0i                                      h3i                           h3i
                                                                                      h3i             h1i         h3i                   h2i
                                                       h0i                    0                 h1i                           h2i
                                                                              0       h0i              0          h0i                   h1i
                                                                                                h0i    0                      h0i
                                                  .   .. ..   .
                                                                                      h0i
                                                                                                h0i
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                              h0i
                                                                                                                                        h0i
                                                                                                                                        h0i


                   Figure 3. Quasi-infinite game tree for the first three moves. Every instance
                             h0i
                   of a node h0i represents a new copy of the entire tree.

suggested by Proposition 3.1, this tree is recursive in several ways and we will use that to
compute its growth function, g = 1 + 2x + 5x2 + 13x3 + · · · , the generating function for the
                                                                                                 h0i
size of its levels. Figure 3 shows only eight nodes on level three, but since the start vector h0i
reappears after a 1 move, a copy of the whole tree hangs below it. This copy adds five nodes
to the eight nodes shown on level three. Since a 1 move leads to the start vector, the set of
all sequences starting with 1 contribute the term xg to the growth function g.
   The start vector also reappears after the play sequence [211], so another tree copy hangs
below that node. Note that the reappearance does not mean that we are back to the staircase;
this partition is different at the bottom. However, the quasi-infinite analysis is based on the
assumption that k is large enough that this difference will not affect the game continuation in
terms of number of playable rows. The level size of the quasi-infinite game tree will coincide
with the finite case until a certain depth. This depth will be determined in Section 5.
   We will now identify all other occurrences of the start vector in the game tree. By Proposi-
tion 3.1(ii) other games that lead to the start vector are [2313 ], [23414 ], etc. The contribution
to the growth function of these recursions is x3 g + x5 g + · · · .
   Another recursiveness appears when we consider play sequences not including any 1 move.
For these sequences, the game goes on as if the top row did not exist. The subtree of these play

                                                                                                                                              5
sequences must therefore be isomorphic to the full tree, but only after the first move 2, which
makes 3 playable. This gives us a term xg, corresponding to [2(. . . ≥ 2)], where (...≥r)
denotes a (possibly empty) sequence of numbers r or greater.
   The neglected top row is always playable, so the type [2(. . . ≥ 2)1], will contribute x2 g to
the growth function.
   Is it possible to end by more than one 1? Yes, if the two top rows are neglected until the
end. Thus the type [23(. . . ≥ 3)11] contributes x4 g. Similarly for three or more top rows one
gets x6 g + x8 g + · · · .
   Table 3 presents the play sequences we have covered so far and their respective contribution
to the growth function g.
               Sequence       Contribution Sequence                    Contribution
               [1 . . .]     xg             [2(. . . ≥ 2)]            xg
              [212 ]         x3 g           [2(. . . ≥ 2)1]           x2 g
              [2313 ]        x5 g           [23(. . . ≥ 3)12 ]        x4 g
               [23414 ]      x7 g           [234(. . . ≥ 4)13 ]       x6 g
              ..             ..             ..                        ..
               .              .              .                         .
             [234 . . . j, 1j ] x2j−1 g      [234 . . . j(. . . ≥ j)1j−1 ] x2(j−1) g
 Table 3. Play sequences and their corresponding contribution to the growth function g.
By virtue of Proposition 3.1(i), these sequences do in fact cover all possible play sequences.
Adding all terms, together with the fact that level 0 (the root) has size 1, we obtain
                                                                         
                                                                      x
                g(x) = (2x + x2 + x3 + · · · )g(x) + 1 = x +                g(x) + 1.    (3.1)
                                                                    1−x
We are now ready to formulate the main result, which involves the classical Fibonacci sequence
(F0 = 0, F1 = 1, F2 = 1, F3 = 2, . . . ).
Theorem 3.2. The generating function g(x) = g0 + g1 x + g2 x2 + · · · for the level sizes in the
quasi-infinite reversed Bulgarian solitaire is
                                  1−x
                        g(x) =               = 1 + 2x + 5x2 + 13x3 + · · ·
                               1 − 3x + x2
where gm = F2m+1 is a bisection of the Fibonacci sequence and has the recurrence gm =
3gm−1 − gm−2 for m ≥ 2.
Proof. The formula is a consequence of (3.1) and identifying coefficients yields the recurrence.
This is the sequence A001519 in The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (OEIS)
[7].                                                                                          

                                  4. Height and leaf count
   In the non-reversed game, the height of a position is defined as the number of moves until
the fixed point is reached (for the first time). This corresponds to disregarding the left subtree
in the reversed game (for example in Figure 2), i.e., considering the root and the subtree [2 . . .]
only.
   For the quasi-infinite tree in Figure 3, let h(x) = h0 + h1 x + h2 x2 + · · · be the height
generating function which counts the level sizes of the root node together with the subtree
[2 . . .]. (As pointed out before, in this subtree occurrences of the quasi-infinite start vector are
not proper staircases, being different at the bottom.) It satisfies
                                       g(x) = xg(x) + h(x).

6
                             LEVEL SIZES OF THE BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE GAME TREE

Using Theorem 3.2 we get
                                     (1 − x)2
                          h(x) =               = 1 + x + 3x2 + 8x3 + · · ·
                                   1 − 3x + x2
and identifying coefficients gives the recurrence

                   h0 = 1,    h1 = 1,    h2 = 3,    hm = 3hm−1 − hm−2 , m ≥ 3.

We have hi = F2i , i ≥ 1, so this is also a bisection of the Fibonacci sequence. It is A088305 in
OEIS [7].
   Recall that the leaves of a game tree are called Garden of Eden partitions. We now turn
our attention to their enumeration. In Figure 2, we find one leaf on level 3, three leaves on
level 4 and so on until level 12 where there are three leaves. Thus, x3 + 3x4 + x5 + · · · + 3x12
is the generating function that counts the leaves on each level in this tree. As before, we have
disregarded the left subtree.
   For the quasi-infinite tree in Figure 3, disregarding the left subtree, let `(x) = `0 + `1 x +
`2 x2 + · · · be the generating function for the number of leaves on each level. We have `(x) =
x3 +3x4 +· · · , where the first term counts [221] and the second term [2221], [2231], and [2321].
If we include the left subtree, we get another generating function L(x) = L0 + L1 x + L2 x2 + . . .
and as with g and h they are related by L(x) = xL(x) + `(x).
   All games are listed in Table 3 and we can count those that start with 2 and end in a
leaf (no bracketed numbers). Games starting with [212 ], [2313 ], [23414 ], etc., may continue
in any way to a leaf, so their contribution to the growth function is x3 L + x5 L + · · · . The
game [2(. . . ≥ 2)1] ends in a leaf unless it is either [21] or of the type [23(. . . ≥ 3)1], so the
contribution is x2 g − x2 − x3 g. In the same way, the game type [23(. . . ≥ 3)11] contributes
x4 g − x4 − x5 g etc. Adding all contributions, we get

     `(x) = (x3 + x5 + · · · )L(x) + (x2 − x3 + x4 − x5 + · · · )g(x) − (x2 + x4 + x6 + · · · ).

Substituting L(x) = `(x)/(1 − x), using the expression for g(x) in Theorem 3.2, and solving
for `(x) yields

                                 x3 − x4
               `(x) =                               = x3 + 3x4 + 9x5 + 25x6 + · · · .              (4.1)
                        (1 − x − x2 )(1 − 3x + x2 )
The coefficient sequence (`1 , `2 , . . .) is essentially A094292 in OEIS [7] (but with an additional
initial zero) and has the explicit formula
                                                F2i−2 − Fi−1
                                         `i =                ,
                                                      2
as is easily verified, for example by decomposing `(x) in (4.1) into partial fractions and iden-
tifying coefficients in each part.
   Since L(x) = `(x)/(1−x), (4.1) yields L(x) = x3 /((1−x−x2 )(1−3x+x2 )). It is well known
that dividing a generating       function by 1 − x gives the generating function for the cumulative
sum. Thus, Lm = m
                        P
                          i=3 `i is the number of leaves up to and including level m. The sequence
(L0 , L1 , . . . ) is A056014 in OEIS and by decomposing L(x) into partial fractions it is easily
verified that
                                            m
                                            X        F2m−1 − Fm+1
                                      Lm =     `i =                .
                                                           2
                                         i=3

                                                                                                      7
                              5. The finite case n = k(k + 1)/2
   We will now investigate what happens when we keep k fixed and increase the tree level d.
In other words, we will see how far the results in the quasi-infinite case apply to the finite case,
when the staircase partition has k rows. Playing 2 lengthens the top row by one and shortens
the bottom row by one, but the other k − 2 rows are unaffected. These will correspond to k − 2
zeros in our representation. As we have seen in Section 3, only the two uppermost zeros can be
involved in a move, so the number of zeros decreases by at most two every move. Therefore,
up to and including level bk/2c, the level sizes are the same as in the quasi-infinite game tree.
   In the finite game tree, at level bk/2c the first dk/2e vector components are unaffected.
For example, for k = 6, the first three components of the vectors at level three are as in
Figure 3. The fourth component, however, is not zero but a negative number. We know that
the sixth component at level 1 is −1 (cf. Example 2.1), which means that the fifth component
at level 2 and the fourth component at level 3 are also negative. Thus, the play sequences
[2345], [2344], [2334] and [2234] are illegal for k = 6 (k even). For k = 7 (k odd) the situation
is similar. The first four vector components are the same as in the quasi-infinite game tree,
but the fifth component in each vector at level 3 is negative and that makes [2345] illegal.
This observation generalizes to the following theorem.

Theorem 5.1. When n = k(k + 1)/2, the sizes of levels 0, 1, . . . , bk/2c in the reversed Bul-
garian solitaire game tree coincide with those of the quasi-infinite game tree but the next level,
bk/2c + 1, has fewer elements, 1 less for odd k and 1 + k/2 less for even k.

Thus, when n = k(k + 1)/2, for 1 ≤ m ≤ bk/2c the number of partitions with m moves of
Bulgarian solitaire to the staircase partition is the Fibonacci number F2m .
   As we saw in Section 1, the game tree for the finite case has a finite height, k(k − 1). One
may ask the question whether it is a subtree of the quasi-infinite tree. In other words, are
all play sequences in the finite reversed game also legal in the quasi-infinite reversed game?
The answer is no. The minimal counter-example is the play sequence [211113] in the reversed
game for k = 4 (which leads from the staircase partition (4, 3, 2, 1) to the partition (5, 5), see
Figure 2). This play sequence is not legal in the quasi-infinite reversed game since [21111]
leads to the start vector in which the third row is not playable.



                                         6. Discussion
   The current paper concerns Bulgarian solitaire in the case where the number of cards n
is triangular, n = k(k + 1)/2 for some positive integer k. Theorem 5.1 gives the number of
partitions with m moves to the staircase partition for 1 ≤ m ≤ bk/2c + 1. A natural open
question is the extension of this result to all m, i.e., to m ≤ k(k − 1). Recall that the maximal
play sequence length in this case is k(k − 1).
   As mentioned in the introduction, when n is not triangular, the game graph has one cycle
per connected component and the game eventually reaches a cycle of partitions. Note that
the fixed point partition for triangular n also constitutes a cycle (of length one). The maximal
sequence length to a cycle partition for any n is conjectured by Griggs and Ho [3].
   For non-triangular n, one may also ask the question corresponding to the one addressed
in the current paper: How many partitions are there with a given sequence length to a cycle
partition? Hopkins and Jones [5] has data on the number of leaves (Garden of Eden partitions)
in the game graph by distance to the cycle, but a full answer to this question is yet to be found.

8
                              LEVEL SIZES OF THE BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE GAME TREE

                                        7. Acknowledgments
   It is a pleasure to thank the anonymous referee for constructive comments and suggestions.
We also thank Anna Jon-And for the idea of investigating the number of partitions with a
given number of moves to the staircase partition in Bulgarian solitaire.

                                               References
[1] J. Brandt, Cycles of partitions, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 85 (1982), no. 3, 483–486.
[2] V. Drensky, The Bulgarian solitaire and the mathematics around it, Math. and Education in Math., Proc.
    of the 44-th Spring Conf. of the Union of Bulgar. Mathematicians, SOK-Kamchia, April 2–6, 2015, 79–91.
[3] J.R. Griggs and C.C. Ho, The cycling of partitions and compositions under repeated shifts, Adv. Appl. Math.
    21 (1998), no. 2, 205–227.
[4] B. Hopkins, 30 years of Bulgarian solitaire, College Math. J. 43 (2012), no. 2, 136–141.
[5] B. Hopkins and M.A. Jones, Shift-induced dynamical systems on partitions and compositions, J. Comb. 13
    (2006), no. 3, R80.
[6] B. Hopkins and J.A. Sellers, Exact enumeration of Garden of Eden partitions, Integers 7 (2007), no. 2, A19.
[7] OEIS Foundation Inc. (2017), The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, http://oeis.org.
[8] N.B. Vassilev, V.L. Gutenmaher, J.M. Rabbot, and A.L. Toom, Zaochnye matematicheskie olimpiady, 2-E
    Izd., Pererab., S Il. (Russian), Nauka, Moscow, 1986.

MSC2010: 05A17, 11P81, 05C63
  School of Computer Science and Communication, Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044
Stockholm, Sweden
  E-mail address: he@kth.se

   School of Education, Culture and Communication, Mälardalen University, Box 883, SE-72123
Västerås, Sweden
   E-mail address: markus.jonsson@mdh.se




                                                                                                             9
Paper II
       LIMIT SHAPES OF STABLE CONFIGURATIONS OF A
            GENERALIZED BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE


                                Kimmo Eriksson
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                      Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                             kimmo.eriksson@mdh.se

                               Markus Jonsson1
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                      Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                             markus.jonsson@mdh.se

                                 Jonas Sjöstrand
            Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Mathematics,
                           SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden
                                  jonass@kth.se




                                          Abstract
Bulgarian solitaire is played on n cards divided into several piles; a move consists
of picking one card from each pile to form a new pile. In a recent generalization,
σ-Bulgarian solitaire, the number of cards you pick from a pile is some function σ
of the pile size, such that you pick σ(h) ≤ h cards from a pile of size h. Here we
consider a special class of such functions. Let us call σ well-behaved if σ(1) = 1
and if both σ(h) and h − σ(h) are non-decreasing functions of h. Well-behaved
σ-Bulgarian solitaire has a geometric interpretation in terms of layers at certain
levels being picked in each move. It also satisfies that if a stable configuration
of n cards exists it is unique. Moreover, if piles are sorted in order of decreasing
size (λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . ) then a configuration is convex if and only if it is a stable
configuration of some well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire. If sorted configurations
are represented by Young diagrams and scaled down to have unit height and unit
area, the stable configurations corresponding to an infinite sequence of well-behaved
functions (σ1 , σ2 , . . . ) may tend to a limit shape φ. We show that every convex φ
with certain properties can arise as the limit shape of some sequence of well-behaved
σn . For the special case when σn (h) = dqn he for 0 < qn ≤ 1, these limit shapes are
triangular (in case qn2 n → 0), or exponential (in case qn2 n → ∞), or interpolating
between these shapes (in case qn2 n → C > 0).
  1 Corresponding author
                                                                                     2

1. Introduction

The game of Bulgarian solitaire is played with a deck of n identical cards divided
arbitrarily into several piles. A move consists of picking a card from each pile and
letting these cards form a new pile. This move is repeated over and over again. For
information about the earlier history of the Bulgarian solitaire and a summary of
subsequent research, see reviews by Hopkins [9] and Drensky [4].
   Let P(n) denote the set of integer partitions of n. An integer partition of n is
                                                                    P`
a λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λ` ) such that λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . ≥ λ` > 0 and i=1 λi = n. For
i > `(λ) it will be convenient to define λi = 0. The number of non-zero parts of the
partition λ is denoted by ` = `(λ). If piles of cards are sorted in order of decreasing
size, any configuration of n cards can be regarded as an integer partition of n. A
geometric shape arises when a configuration λ is represented by a Young diagram
of unit squares in the first quadrant of a coordinate system for the real plane, such
that the ith column has height λi . A move of the Bulgarian solitaire then has the
geometric interpretation of picking the first (i.e., bottom) layer of the diagram and
making it the new first column, left-shifting cards if needed so that the configuration
remains sorted.




                              →                       →




Figure 1: A move in Bulgarian solitaire from λ = (7, 3, 2, 0, 0, . . . ) ∈ P(12): The
bottom layer is picked to form a new pile with three cards and the cards are then
left-shifted.

   Olson [10] recently introduced a generalization of Bulgarian solitaire in which the
number of cards picked from a pile of size h is given by σ(h), where σ : Z+ → N can
be any function such that σ(h) ≤ h for all h ∈ Z+ . The ordinary Bulgarian solitaire
is obtained for the constant function σ(h) = 1. Olson studied cycle lengths, proving
a general upper bound on cycle lengths for any specification of σ.
   The key results known to hold for ordinary Bulgarian solitaire do not generalize to
Olson’s σ-Bulgarian solitaire. For instance, it is well-known that ordinary Bulgarian
solitaire has the property that if a stable (i.e., fixpoint) configuration exists it is
unique [3]. This uniqueness property of stable configurations does not generally
hold for the σ-Bulgarian solitaire; a simple counter-example is obtained by defining
σ(1) = 1, σ(2) = 1, and σ(3) = 3, in which case both (2,1) and (3) are stable
                                                                                      3

configurations of three cards. To avoid such pathological cases we impose some
additional conditions on σ:

Definition 1. A σ-Bulgarian solitaire is said to be well-behaved if the following
three conditions on σ are satisfied:

  1. σ(1) = 1,

  2. σ(h) is a non-decreasing function,

  3. σ̄(h) := h − σ(h) is a non-decreasing function.

   The first condition in the definition says that from a pile with just a single card,
you pick that card. The second condition says that you never pick fewer cards from
a larger pile than from a smaller pile. The third condition says that the number of
unpicked cards are never fewer in the larger pile than in a smaller pile.
   The aim of this paper is to show how a number of properties that are well-known
to hold for ordinary Bulgarian solitaire generalize to well-behaved σ-Bulgarian soli-
taire. A simple example is the dominance property: If a configuration λ is dom-
inated by another configuration κ, in the sense that λi ≤ κi holds for all i, then
this dominance relation is preserved as the solitaire is played in parallel from the
two configurations. Let λ ≤ κ denote the dominance relation and let λnew and κnew
denote the configurations obtained from playing one move of σ-Bulgarian solitaire
from configurations λ and κ, respectively.

Theorem 1. The implication λ ≤ κ ⇒ λnew ≤ κnew holds in σ-Bulgarian solitaire
if both σ and σ̄ are non-decreasing functions. In particular, the implication holds
for well-behaved σ.

Proof. If σ̄ is non-decreasing, what remains of the old piles of λ will be dominated by
what remains of the old piles of κ. If σ is non-decreasing, the new pile formed from
λ will be dominated by the new pile formed from κ. This pilewise dominance clearly
remains when the piles in each configuration are sorted by size. By Definition 1, all
well-behaved σ satisfy that both σ and σ̄ are non-decreasing functions.

   We now outline the other properties to be examined in this paper. In section 2
we show that moves of any well-behaved σ-solitaire have a geometric interpretation
in terms of picking certain layers of cards. In section 3 we demonstrate that sta-
ble configurations of any well-behaved σ-solitaire are unique for any n for which
a stable configuration exists. In section 4 we characterize stable configurations of
well-behaved σ-solitaires as convex (i.e., λi −λi+1 ≥ λi+1 −λi+2 for all i ≥ 1). In sec-
tions 5 and 6 we define limit shapes of stable configurations for an infinite sequence
of well-behaved σn -solitaires and show that any convex shape can be obtained as a
limit shape of such a sequence.
                                                                                       4

   In section 7 we define the surplus and deficit of a configuration with respect to
a given stable configuration and show that the total surplus and total deficit can
decrease but never increase as a well-behaved σ-solitaire is played. This property
suggests that as a well-behaved σ-solitaire is played the configurations tend to con-
verge toward stable configurations. We conjecture that recurrent configurations are
so close to stable configurations that they have the same limit shape. In sections 8
and 9 we prove this conjecture in the special case when the σn -solitaires are given
by σn (h) = dqn he for qn ∈ (0, 1]. The limit shapes of stable and recurrent configu-
rations are then triangular in case qn2 n → 0, and exponential in case qn2 n → ∞.



2. A geometric interpretation of well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaires

The moves of a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire has an intuitive geometric inter-
pretation. First note that σ is well-behaved if and only if it satisfies the boundary
condition σ(1) = 1 and the condition that for all pile sizes h > 0 the difference
∆σ(h) := σ(h) − σ(h − 1) equals either 1 or 0. We can then record the values
of h for which ∆σ(h) = 1 as a (finite or infinite) sequence H1 = 1, H2 , H3 , . . . .
For any index i for which Hi is defined it follows follows from the definition that
Hi = min{h : σ(h) = i}. A move of the σ-Bulgarian solitaire can now be described
as a move on the Young diagram of the configuration in which the cards in layers
number H1 = 1, H2 , H3 , . . . (counted from the bottom) are removed to form a new
column; sorting is then achieved by left-shifting the cards in every layer. See Fig-
ure 2 for an example. Note that ordinary Bulgarian solitaire is the special case in
which only row number H1 = 1 is removed to form a new column.




         H2 = 4                  →                       →



         H1 = 1

Figure 2: A move from the partition λ = (7, 3, 2, 0, 0, . . . ) ∈ P(12) in a well-behaved
σ-Bulgarian solitaire in which layers number H1 = 1 and H2 = 4 are picked to form
a new pile with four cards.


Observation 1. In the geometric interpretation of a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian soli-
taire, σ(h) equals the number of picked layers up to layer h.

  In a move of a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire, the layers at levels H1 =
                                                                                         5

1, H2 , H3 , . . . are picked and any other layer, say at level h, drops σ(h) levels down
(with one of the picked card inserted at the left end). A layer may continue to
drop down for several moves but must eventually reach one of the levels H1 =
1, H2 , H3 , . . . and there be picked. Thus, any card currently at level h will eventually
be picked at some level P (h) that can be calculated recursively by
                            (
                              h              if h ∈ {H1 = 1, H2 , H3 , . . .},
                    P (h) =
                              P (h − σ(h)) otherwise.

The following observation then follows immediately by induction.

Observation 2. In the geometric interpretation of a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian soli-
taire, it holds for any level h that the set

                   {P (h), P (h − 1), P (h − 2), . . . , P (h − σ(h) + 1)}

is some permutation of the set {H1 = 1, H2 , . . . , Hσ(h) }.



3. Uniqueness of stable configurations

Recall that a configuration is said to be stable with respect to σ-Bulgarian solitaire
if a move in the solitaire leaves the configuration invariant.

Lemma 1. On the condition that σ̄ is a non-decreasing function, λ is a stable
configuration with respect to σ-Bulgarian solitaire if and only if λi+1 = σ̄(λi ) for
all i ≥ 1.

Proof. A move of the solitaire decreases the size of any pile from λi to σ̄(λi ) and
then creates a new pile such that the sum of all pile sizes stays constant at n,
the total number of cards. Because σ̄ is assumed to be a non-decreasing function,
the decreased piles will still satisfy σ̄(λi ) ≥ σ̄(λi+1 ) for all i ≥ 1, that is, they
will not need to be reordered. Therefore λ is a stable configuration if and only if
σ̄(λi ) = λi+1 for all i ≥ 1, as the new pile will then necessarily have size λ1 .

Theorem 2. If σ̄ is a non-decreasing function, there is at most one stable config-
uration with respect to σ-Bulgarian solitaire for a given number n of cards.

Proof. When σ̄ is a non-decreasing function it follows from Lemma 1 that each
stable configuration is completely determined by the choice of λ1 , the size of the
largest pile. Let λ be a stable configuration with n cards and consider another
stable configuration λ0 with λ1 > λ01 . It follows immediately by induction that
λi ≥ λ0i for all i ≥ 1, and consequently that the total number of cards in these two
configurations are different.
                                                                                     6

   We can also bound the difference in the total number of cards between consecutive
stable configurations in a well-behaved σ-solitaire.

Corollary 1. Assume that σ(1) = 1 and that both σ and σ̄ are non-decreasing
functions and let λ and λ0 be the stable configurations (with respect to σ-Bulgarian
solitaire) determined by first piles of size λ1 and λ01 = λ1 + 1, respectively. Then
the difference in the total number of cards between λ0 and λ is at most `(λ) + 1.

Proof. As we noted in the introduction, the assumption that both σ and σ̄ are non-
decreasing functions implies that for any pile size h we have that σ(h + 1) − σ(h)
equals either 1 or 0. Starting from the relation λ01 = λ1 + 1, it follows immediately
by induction that as long as σ(λi + 1) − σ(λi ) = 0 we will also have λ0i+1 = λi+1 + 1.
The first time we instead have σ(λi + 1) − σ(λi ) = 1, we will obtain λ0i+1 = λi+1 ,
and from that point on the pile sizes will be identical in the two configurations.
Thus, the difference in the total number of cards is equal to the number of piles
that differed in size, which is at most the number of piles in the larger configuration
λ0 . Because each of its piles is at most one larger than the corresponding piles in
the smaller configuration λ, it can have at most one pile more. Hence, the difference
in the total number of cards is bounded by `(λ) + 1.



4. Characterization of stable configurations

We shall now characterize what stable configurations of well-behaved σ-solitaires
look like. Define a configuration λ as convex if λi − λi+1 ≥ λi+1 − λi+2 ≥ 0 for all
i ≥ 1.

Lemma 2. A configuration λ is convex if and only if it is a stable configuration of
a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire.

Proof. First assume that λ is a stable configuration of a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian
solitaire. Then Lemma 1 says that λi − λi+1 = σ(λi ) ≥ 0 for all i ≥ 1. As a
well-behaved σ is non-decreasing, this inequality implies that λ is convex.
   To prove the converse, assume that λ is a convex configuration with ` nonzero
piles. Then for each i ≥ 1 we can choose a subset of (λi −λi+1 )−(λi+1 −λi+2 ) layers
in the interval of layers (λi+1 , λi ]. Note that this means all layers in the interval
(0, λ` ] are chosen, in particular layer 1. A well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire is
therefore defined by picking the chosen layers in each move. Moreover, for all i ≥ 1
the corresponding σ will satisfy σ(λi ) = λi − λi+1 as the latter expression equals
the number of picked layers up to layer λi (see Observation 1). Thus, λ is a stable
configuration of this well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire.
                                                                                     7

5. The concept of limit shapes of stable and recurrent configurations

We shall consider a sequence of well-behaved σn , for n = 1, 2, . . . . Let fσn :
P(n) → P(n) denote the map on integer partitions of n defined by a move of
the σn -Bulgarian solitaire. For any n, the σn -Bulgarian solitaire can be regarded
as the deterministic process on P(n) defined by the iteration of the map fσn .
   Given a process on P(n) defined by the iteration of any map fn : P(n) → P(n),
we say that a configuration λ ∈ P(n) is stable with respect to this process in case
f (λ) = λ, and that the configuration is recurrent if there exists a positive integer
k such that fnk (λ) = λ. Thus, the stable configurations constitute a subset of the
recurrent configurations. Note that the set of all configurations, P(n), is finite.
Regardless of choice of starting configuration, the process must therefore inevitably
enter the set of recurrent configurations after a finite number of moves. We shall
now define what we mean by limit shapes of stable or recurrent configurations.

5.1. Downscaling of diagram-boundary functions
For any partition λ, define its diagram-boundary function as the nonnegative, weakly
decreasing and piecewise constant function ∂λ : R≥0 → R given by

                                  ∂λ(x) = λbxc+1 .

To illustrate, Figure 3 depicts the function graph y = ∂λ(x) for the partition λ =
(4, 4, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0, . . . ).

                       y
                        6
                      4 t          d

                      3

                      2            t    d

                      1                 t            d

                      0                              t   -x
                          0   1   2     3    4       5

 Figure 3: Function graph y = ∂λ(x) for the partition λ = (4, 4, 2, 1, 1) ∈ P(12).

   To achieve limiting behavior of such function graphs as n grows we need to
rescale diagrams depending on the value of n. Following [6] and [12] we apply a
scaling factor an > 0 such that all row lengths are multiplied by 1/an and all column
heights are multiplied by an /n, yielding a constant area of 1. To avoid having to
                                                                                        8

specify the scaling factor we shall consistently make the choice an = n/λ1 , such
that the height of the diagram is also scaled to 1. Thus, given a partition λ we
define the downscaled diagram-boundary function of λ as the positive, real-valued,
weakly decreasing and piecewise constant function ∂λ : R≥0 → R≥0 given by
                                 1               1
                       ∂λ(x) =      ∂λ(xn/λ1 ) =    λbxn/λ1 c+1 .                     (1)
                                 λ1              λ1

5.2. Limit shapes of recurrent configurations
Given an infinite family of maps on configurations, {fn : P(n) → P(n)} for n =
1, 2, 3, . . . , we say that φ : R≥0 → R≥0 is a limit shape of recurrent configurations
of the corresponding family of processes if the downscaled diagrams of recurrent
configurations with respect to f1 , f2 , f3 , . . . converge to φ in the following sense:

                              ∂λ(n) (x) → φ(x) as n → ∞                               (2)

for all x > 0, where λ(n) is any recurrent configuration of fn .

5.3. Limit shapes of stable configurations of well-behaved σn -solitaires
Consider a sequence of well-behaved σn for n = 1, 2, . . . . For each value of n,
consider σn -Bulgarian solitaire and let

   n∗ = n∗ (n) := max{n0 ≤ n : there exists a stable configuration of n0 cards}.

The number n∗ is well-defined as there always exists a stable configuration on a
                       ∗
single card. Define λ(n ) as the stable configuration on n∗ cards; this is well-defined
                                                                       ∗
according to Theorem 2. According to Corollary 1, the choice λ(n (n)) as the stable
                                                                         ∗
configuration corresponding to n will be the same for at most `(λ(n )(n) ) + 1 values
of n. Thus, n∗ (n) tends to infinity as n tends to infinity. In line with the limit shape
concept defined in equation (2), we define a limit shape of stable configurations for
the sequence of well-behaved σn , n = 1, 2, . . . , as a function φ : R≥0 → R≥0 such
that
                                 ∗
                           ∂λ(n (n)) (x) → φ(x) as n → ∞                               (3)
for all x > 0.



6. Characterization of limit shapes of stable configurations of well-behaved
   σn -solitaires

It is well-known that the Bulgarian solitaire has a stable configuration if only if
the total number of cards in the deck is a triangular number, n = 1 + 2 + . . . + k
for some positive integer k, in which case the unique stable configuration has one
                                                                                       9

pile of each integer size from k down to 1 [3]. Thus, the Young diagrams of stable
configurations are staircase shaped and hence the limit shape, as n tends to infinity,
is a triangle. By the convention that the height and area are scaled to unity, the
limit shape will be a triangle of height 1 and width 2.
   When generalizing from ordinary Bulgarian solitaire to well-behaved σn -Bulgarian
solitaire, the limit shapes that arise will not necessarily be triangular. Indeed, in
Theorem 3 we prove that any convex shape (with some properties) can be obtained
as the limit shape of a suitably chosen family of well-behaved σn , for n = 1, 2, . . . .
First we need a lemma.

Lemma 3. Let fn : (0, ∞) → R be convex functions for n = 1, 2, . . . , and suppose
there is a function f : (0, ∞) → R such that limn→∞ fn (x) = f (x) for any x > 0.
Then we also have pointwise convergence of right derivatives: limn→∞ (fn )0R (x) =
fR0 (x) for any x > 0.

Proof. Clearly, f is convex. Therefore the left derivative fL0 and the right derivative
fR0 exists in all points in (0, ∞). By the definition of right derivative, for any ε > 0
there exists an h > 0 such that
                             f (x + h) − f (x)
                                               < fR0 (x) + ε
                                     h
for all x > 0. Since limn→∞ fn (x) = f (x), there exists an N ∈ N such that

                   fn (x + h) − fn (x)
                                       < fR0 (x) + ε for all n > N.
                            h

By the convexity of fn , we have fn (x+h)−f
                                        h
                                           n (x)
                                                 ≥ fn0 (x). Therefore,

                         fn0 (x) < fR0 (x) + ε for all n > N.

An analogous reasoning for the left-derivative gives fn0 (x) > fL0 (x) − ε. Thus,
fL0 (x) − ε < fn0 (x) < fR0 (x) + ε for all n > N . As a consequence we must have
limn→∞ fn0 (x) = f 0 (x), in particular limn→∞ (fn )0R (x) = fR0 (x) for any x > 0.

Theorem 3. Let φ : (0, ∞) → R≥0 be a function and let a1 , a2 , . . . → ∞ be any
(positive) scaling factors such that a2n /n converges to some c ≥ 0 as n → ∞. Then
the following are equivalent.

 (a) There is a sequence of well-behaved σn , n = 1, 2, . . . , such that φ is a stable-
     limit shape of (σn ) under the scaling (an ).
                       R∞
 (b) φ is convex with 0 φ(x) dx ≤ 1, and if c > 0 the right derivative φ0R (x) is
     an integer multiple of c for any x > 0.
                                                                                          10

Proof. To prove that (a) implies (b), suppose φ is a stable-limit shape of (σn ) under
                             ∗
the scaling (an ). Let λ(n ) denote the stable configuration in the σn -Bulgarian
solitaire with n∗ (n) cards.
   For each n, define a piecewise linear function φn : (0, ∞) → R≥0 by letting
                               an            (n∗ )           (n∗ )   
                  φn (x) =        (1 − t(x))λban xc+1 + t(x)λban xc+2 ,
                               n
where t(x) := an x − ban xc. Since each φn is convex, so is φ, and by Fatou’s lemma
                      Z ∞                    Z ∞
                           φ(x) dx ≤ lim inf     φn (x) dx ≤ 1.
                         0                     n→∞        0

   Now suppose c > 0. By Lemma 3, (φn )0R (x) → φ0R (x) for any x > 0, so

                                        (φn )0R (x)
                                                    → φ0R (x)/c
                                          a2n /n

as n → ∞. But
                             (φn )0R (x)     (n∗ )       (n∗ )
                                2
                                         = (λban xc+2 − λban xc+1 ),
                               an /n
which is an integer, so it follows that φ0R (x)/c is an integer.
   For the other direction, suppose (b) holds true and that c = 0. Since φ is convex,
it has a right derivate φ0R . Let s1 , s2 , . . . be a sequence of positive real numbers
such that sn → ∞ but sn a2n /n → 0 as n → ∞, and such that sn an is an integer for
any n.
   Define a partition λ(n) by letting
                                             sn an
                                   (n)
                                             X          n
                                λk       =           b− 2 φ0R (i/an )c
                                                       an
                                             i=k+1

for k = 1, 2, . . . . By the convexity of φ, we have
                    Z ∞
     (n)       n                       n
   λk ≤ −                 φ0 (x) dx =     φ(k/an ),
              an k/an R                an
                    Z sn
     (n)       n                                    n
                              φ0 (x) dx − sn an =
                                                                             
   λk ≥ −                                             φ((k + 1)/an ) − φ(sn ) − sn an .
              an (k+1)/an R                       an

From the first of these inequalities it follows that
                             ∞                   Z ∞
                             X      (n)                  n
                                   λk     ≤ an              φ(x) dx ≤ n.
                                                     0   an
                             k=1

           (n)     (n)                                          (n)        (n)   (n)
Now, let µk = λk for k = 2, 3, . . . but choose µ1 so that µ1 + µ2 + · · · = n.
Clearly, µ(n) is monotonic convex, so by Lemma 2 it is a stable configuration of a
                                                                                   11

σn -Bulgarian solitaire for some well-behaved rule σn . Since φ is continuous, for any
x > 0 we have
                           an
                              λdan xe ≤ φ(dan xe/an ) → φ(x)
                            n
and, since sn → ∞ and sn a2n /n → 0 as n → ∞, for any x > 0,

                an                                        sn a2n
                   λdan xe ≥ φ(dan x + 1e/an ) − φ(sn ) −        → φ(x),
                n                                           n
in other words, ann λdan xe → φ(x) for any x > 0, establishing that φ is the desired
stable-limit shape by the definition (3).
   Now suppose (b) holds true and c > 0. Define a partition λ(n) by letting
                                                ∞
                                   (n)        1 X 0     √
                                  λk     =−       φR (i/ cn)
                                              c
                                               i=k+1

for k = 1, 2, . . . . Since φ is convex, we have
                           √ Z ∞
                                                               √
                                                     r
                 (n)         cn           0             n
               λk ≤ −               √
                                        φ R (x) dx =      φ(k/ cn),
                            c     k/ cn                 c
                           √ Z ∞
                                                                        √
                                                          r
                 (n)         cn               0             n
               λk ≥ −                   √
                                             φR (x) dx =      φ((k + 1)/ cn).
                            c     (k+1)/ cn                 c

From the first of these inequalities it follows that
                         ∞               Z ∞r
                        X    (n)    √           n
                            λk ≤ cn               φ(x) dx ≤ n.
                                           0    c
                            k=1

              (n)     (n)                                (n)         (n)    (n)
   Now, let µk = λk for k = 2, 3, . . . but choose µ1 so that µ1 +µ2 +· · · = n.
Clearly, µ(n) is monotonic convex, so by Lemma 2 it is a stable configuration of a
σn -Bulgarian solitaire for some well-behaved rule σn . Finally, since a2n /n → c as
n → ∞, and since φ is continuous, for any x > 0 we have
           an             √      an           an         √
    φ(x) ← √ φ(dan x + 1e/ cn) ≤    λdan xe ≤ √ φ(dan xe/ cn) → φ(x),
            cn                   n             cn

and hence φ is the desired limit shape.

   Note that for a finite n a Young diagram will have unit area under
                                                                   R ∞ our conven-
tional scaling with scaling factors (an ). The reason why we have 0 φ(x) dx ≤ 1 in
Theorem 3 is that the largest pile (or a few of the largest piles) may be arbitrarily
large without affecting the limit shape φ. Our limit shape definitions (2) and (3)
do not include x = 0 as to allow for limx→0+ φ(x) to be infinite.
                                                                                         12

7. A conjecture on limit shapes of recurrent configurations of well-behaved
   σn -solitaires

When a stable configuration exists, ordinary Bulgarian solitaire eventually reaches
it. This does not hold in general for well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire. One
counter-example is given by the well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire defined by σ(h) =
d3h/10e on n = 11 cards, as this game has both a stable configuration (5, 3, 2, 1)
and a non-trivial cycle

            (6, 2, 2, 1) 7→ (5, 4, 1, 1) 7→ (6, 3, 2) 7→ (4, 4, 2, 1) 7→ (6, 2, 2, 1).

However, it is worth noting that the pile sizes in these recurrent configurations
never deviated by more than one card from the corresponding pile sizes in the
stable configuration. This is akin to the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire in the case
when n is not a triangular number so that no stable configuration exists; in that
case the solitaire will eventually reach a cycle of recurrent configurations, and these
are close to staircase shaped in the sense that they can all be constructed by starting
with some staircase configuration (k, k − 1, . . . , 1) and adding at most one card to
each pile, and possibly adding one more pile of size 1 [1, 2, 7, 8]. As n grows to
infinity and the diagram is rescaled such that its height and area are both equal to
1, the deviation of recurrent configurations from the perfect staircase tends to zero.
Thus, ordinary Bulgarian solitaire has a limit shape, namely the triangle of height
1 and width 2.
   We believe that it is generally true that recurrent configurations must be suffi-
ciently close to a stable configuration for a limit shape of stable configurations to
also be a limit shape of recurrent configurations.
Conjecture 1. If φ is a limit shape of the stable configurations of a sequence of
well-behaved σn , then φ is also a limit shape of the recurrent configurations.

   We leave this conjecture as an open problem. A first step toward its proof is that
a configuration’s total deviation from a stable configuration will often decrease but
never increase during play, as we show below.

7.1. Deviations, surplus, and deficit, with reference to a stable configu-
     ration
Represent configurations by infinite vectors of pile sizes (a finite number of non-zero
piles and an infinite tail of zeros). For a given σ-Bulgarian solitaire, fix some stable
configuration λ∗ to be used as a reference and let n∗ denote the number of cards of
λ∗ .
    For any configuration λ of n cards we can calculate the component-wise difference
to the reference configuration λ∗ to obtain an infinite deviation vector d(λ) := λ−λ∗ .
The sum of the elements of the deviation vector must equal the difference in the
                                                                                         13

number of cards in the two configurations: d1 + d2 + · · · = n − n∗ , suppressing the
dependence on λ to avoid cumbersome notation.
   The deviation vector can be decomposed as d(λ) = d+ (λ) − d− (λ) where the
surplus vector d+ (λ) is given by d+   i = max(di , 0) for all i ≥ 1, and the deficit vector
d− (λ) is given by d−i  = max(−d   i , 0) for all i ≥ 1. Denote the total surplus and total
                            −
deficit in by d+
               tot (λ) and dtot (λ),  respectively.   Then, obviously,
                                           −              ∗
                               d+
                                tot (λ) − dtot (λ) = n − n .

Thus, the difference between total surplus and total deficit is invariant under play.

7.2. The total surplus never decreases in well-behaved σ-Bulgarian soli-
     taires
It is well-known and easy to see that ordinary Bulgarian solitaire has the property
that a move can never increase the total surplus: d+            +
                                                     tot (λ) ≥ dtot (λ
                                                                      new
                                                                          ) will always
hold. This property generalizes to well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire. To prove this
we shall extend the geometric interpretation of the solitaire by marking some cards
as plus-cards or minus-cards with special properties.
   Given a reference stable configuration λ∗ of n∗ cards, any configuration λ of n
cards can be transformed to a marked version of λ in the following two steps:

   1. Marking plus-cards: For any pile index i such that λi > λ∗i (i.e., such that the
      pile has a surplus d+          ∗                   +
                          i = λi − λi > 0), mark the di top cards of the pile as
      plus-cards.

   2. Creating minus-cards: For any pile index i such that λi < λ∗i (i.e., such that
      the pile has a deficit d−    ∗                               −
                              i = λi − λi > 0), add an additional di minus-cards to
      the top of the pile.

Observation 3. In the marked version of λ the plus-cards and unmarked cards
together make up λ, while the minus-cards and unmarked cards together make up
λ∗ . It follows that the number of plus-cards equals the total surplus and the number
of minus-cards equals the total deficit.

   Recall the geometric interpretation of well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire de-
scribed in section 2: Remove the cards in layers number H1 = 1, H2 , H3 , . . .
(counted from the bottom) and let these cards form a new first pile, then sort
the configuration by left-shifting the cards in every layer. The rules of play on
marked configurations follow this interpretation, with the following special rules for
marked cards.
   Cancellation within the new pile: When a new first pile is formed, all minus-cards
and plus-cards in this pile float to the top of the pile. If there are both minus-cards
                                                                                    14

and plus-cards in the pile then cancellation occurs: Repeatedly replace one minus-
card and one plus-card by a single unmarked card until either there are no more
minus-cards or there are no more plus-cards in the pile.
   Cancellation within a layer : Left-shifting layers clearly corresponds to minus-
cards in the first pile swapping places with any cards to the right in the same layer.
If at any point a minus-card that started in the first pile swaps places with a plus-
card, replace the minus-card and the plus-card by a single unmarked card; then
continue left-shifting as usual.
   We shall refer to this process as the marked σ-Bulgarian solitaire.
Lemma 4. If a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire from λ is played in parallel with
the marked σ-Bulgarian solitaire from the marked version of λ, Observation 3 will
continue to hold.

Proof. First restrict attention to the movement of the minus-cards and unmarked
cards. Together they make up the stable configuration λ∗ so, precisely because this
is a stable configuration, these cards will still make up λ∗ after a move. Now restrict
attention to the movement of plus-cards and unmarked cards. Together they make
up λ so clearly after one move they will make up λnew . Finally, different types
of cards interact only in the form of cancellations within the new pile or within a
layer. In both forms of cancellation, the configuration made up of minus-cards and
unmarked cards together is unchanged as in effect a minus-card is replaced by an
unmarked card. The same goes for the configuration made up of plus-cards and
unmarked cards together.

  From Lemma 4 the desired result follows immediately.
Theorem 4. Total surplus and total deficit may decrease but never increase during
play of a well-behaved σ-solitaire.

Proof. From Lemma 4 and the rules of the marked σ-Bulgarian solitaire it follows
that the total surplus equals the number of plus-cards and the total deficit equals
the number of minus-cards, which decrease when cancellations occur but never
increase.

   In order to prove Conjecture 1 we now only need to prove that whenever the
deviation from the closest stable configuration is large, a cancellation of a plus-card
against a minus-card must eventually occur.
   A reason why it is likely that a cancellation will eventually occur is that when
plus-cards start over from the first pile they obviously do so from a higher level
than minus-cards. It will therefore generally take a greater number of moves for
a plus-card than for a minus-card from when it starts over until it reaches the
level of a picking layer where it starts over again. Thus minus-cards have shorter
periods than plus-cards and should eventually catch up with them. For ordinary
                                                                                     15

Bulgarian solitaire, which has only one picking layer, this argument is sufficient to
prove that cancellations must occur until no more minus-cards remain. In general,
however, well-behaved σ-solitaire has several picking layers and this makes it difficult
to perform a rigorous study of periods. However, we still believe that it may be
possible to overcome these technical difficulties to achieve a proof of Conjecture 1.



8. Limit shapes of stable configurations of qn -proportion Bulgarian soli-
   taire

In order to calculate explicit limit shapes we make a canonical choice of a well-
behaved σ, namely σ(h) = dqhe for q ∈ (0, 1]. (It should be obvious that this
function satisfies the conditions for being well-behaved, see Definition 1.) In words,
this form of σ defines a solitaire in which from each pile we pick a number of
cards given by the proportion q of the pile size, rounded upward to the closest
integer. We will refer to this solitaire as q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire. Following
the geometric interpretation of well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire, the cards picked
in q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire can be seen as layers number H1 , H2 , H3 , . . . ,
where for any i > 0 we have Hi = min{h : dqn he = i}. Thus, q-proportion
Bulgarian solitaire is a well-behaved σ-Bulgarian solitaire in which the picked layers
are approximately equidistant.
   We may let the choice of q depend on n, in which we write qn . Note that for
qn ≤ 1/n only one card is picked in any pile. Thus by choosing qn ≤ 1/n we obtain
ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.
   Thanks to Lemma 1 we can determine a unique stable configuration of a q-
proportion solitaire by choosing the size of the largest part and then obtain the
other parts by repeatedly applying the function σ̄(h) = h − dqhe. This makes it
easy to determine the limit shapes of stable configurations. Specifically, we identify
three different regimes defined by the asymptotic behavior of nqn2 .
   First, in case nqn2 tends to zero as n tends to infinity, stable configurations have
a triangular limit shape. This is a direct generalization of the limit shape result for
the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.
   The second regime is when nqn2 tends to infinity, in which case an exponential
limit shape is obtained. The borderline regime when nqn2 tends to a constant C
yields an infinite family of limit shapes (parameterized by C), which interpolate
between the triangular shape of the first regime and the exponential shape of the
second regime.
   A move of q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire involves rounding the number of
picked cards in each pile to integers. The three regimes differ in how much im-
pact this rounding has on the result. The following couple of lemmas estimate the
impact of rounding.
                                                                                  16

Lemma 5. After a move in q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire from a configuration
with m non-empty piles, the size of the new pile is nq + r where 0 ≤ r < m.

Proof. By the definition of q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire, the contribution to the
new pile from any old non-empty pile λi is dqλi e, which is bounded from below and
from above by
                               λi q ≤ dqλi e < λi q + 1.
The lemma follows from summing over all m non-empty piles.

Lemma 6. The number of moves in q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire until a pile of
size h disappears is at most
                               ln(qh) + 1
                                          .
                                   q
Proof. In each move a pile decreases at least by a factor of (1 − q). A pile starting
at size h will have gone down to size 1/q after at most ln(1/(qh))/ ln(1 − q) moves,
which (using the MacLaurin expansion of the denominator) in turn is bounded by
ln(qh)/q. From size 1/q and onward the pile will, due to rounding, lose exactly 1
card per move for 1/q moves at which point the pile has disappeared.

   We shall now derive the limit shape of stable configurations depending on the
asymptotic behavior of nqn2 . See Figure 4.




       (a)                      (b)




                     (c)

Figure 4: The three cases of limit shapes in Theorem 5: (a) triangular, (b) expo-
nential, and (c) interpolating with J linear sections, here illustrated for J = 3.

  First, recall from Section 5.1 that the scaling factor we employ is an = n/λ1 =
 1
qn .Thus, if qn is bounded away from zero, then the scaling q1n is bounded and
hence cannot transform the jumpy boundary diagrams into a smooth limit shape.
Therefore we shall require
                                 qn → 0 as n → ∞.
                                                                                      17

Theorem 5. There are three cases for limit shapes of stable configurations of q-
proportion Bulgarian solitaire, depending on the asymptotic behavior of nqn2 :

 (a) In case nqn2 → 0, there is a triangular limit shape. Under the standard scaling
     we apply, by which the height of the diagram is scaled to 1, the downward slope
     of the triangle will be 1/2.

 (b) In case nqn2 → ∞, there is an exponential limit shape.

 (c) Interpolating between the two previous cases is the case nqn2 → C > 0. Define
     z > 0 by the equation
                                                  dze−1
                                     z 2 + dze2    X       1
                              2C =              −
                                         dze       i=0
                                                        dze − i

      and set A0 = Cz 1+z−dze  dze  and Ak = Cz dze−k
                                                  1
                                                       for 1 ≤ k ≤ dze − 1. The limit
      shape approximates the exponential shape using Z := dze linear sections such
      that the first section has width A0 and every subsequent section, numbered
      k = 1, 2, . . . , Z − 1, has width Ak . The slope of the ith section is C(Z−i)
                                                                                z2   for
      all i = 0, 1, . . . , Z − 1.

Proof. (a) In case nqn2 → 0 we shall see that the effect of rounding dominates in
a move √ from the stable configuration. Specifically, for all   √ sufficiently large n we
have qn 2n < 1 and hence dqn he = 1 for all      √  0 <  h  <     2n. Now, assume that
the largest pile of a configuration is λ1 ≈ √      2n. Then the size of this pile will
decrease by 1 card per move until after dλ1 e ≈ 2n moves the pile has disappeared.
By Lemma 1 the corresponding triangular configuration λ is stable. The number
of cards in this configuration is approximately n, which confirms that a stable      √
configuration of n cards (if it exists) will indeed have a largest√pile of size ≈ 2n.
Downscaling (where the  p vertical scaling factor is 1/λ1 = 1/ 2n and horizontal
scaling factor λ1 /n√= 2/n) yields a boundary diagram ∂λ where column          p k has
height 1 − (k − 1)/ 2n, k = 1, 2, . . . . Since the widthpof each√column is 2/n, the
boundary diagram function for λ is ∂λ(x) = 1 − bx/ 2/nc/ 2n → ∞ as n → ∞.
By definition (3), the proposed limit shape is y = 1 − x/2 for x ≥ 0.
    (b) In case nqn2 → ∞ the effect of rounding turns out to be negligible in a
move from the stable configuration. Let λ1 denote the largest pile in the stable
configuration and let m denote the number of non-empty piles. In view of Lemma 1
it follows from sequential application of Lemma 5 and Lemma 6 that
                                                                  
                    λ1              m                 ln(qn λ1 ) + 1
                       =1+O                =1+O                        .
                   nqn             nqn                     nqn2

Under the assumption nqn2 → ∞ it is easy to see that the second term, which
estimates the total effect of rounding after downscaling, will tend to zero. With no
                                                                                         18

rounding, pile sizes decrease geometrically with decay factor 1 − qn . Thus, after
downscaling the stable configuration is asymptotically equal to a configuration λ
with a first pile of size 1 and subsequent piles of size 1 − qn , (1 − qn )2 , . . . . Since
the horizontal scaling factor is λ1 /n = qn , the width of each column in the rescaled
boundary diagram ∂λ is qn . Thus ∂λ(x) = (1 − qn )bx/qn c for x ≥ 0. As n → ∞,
qn → 0 and ∂λ(x) → e−x , proving the proposed limit shape.
   (c) For the remaining case, the crucial observation is that the rate by which a
pile melts away depends on how the pile size relates to multiples of 1/qn . Any pile
size can be expressed on the form y/qn for some y > 0. From a pile of that size,
a move will take away the amount dye. Thus, a pile starting l    at ma size of z/qn will
                                                              1+z−Z
initially melt away at a slope of Z = dze per move for         Zqn     moves, i.e. until
the pile size reaches lthe threshold
                               m     (Z − 1)/qn . At this point the slope decreases to
                           1
Z − 1 per move for     qn (Z−1)   moves until the pile size reaches the next threshold,
(Z − 2)/qn , etc. This pattern ends with a section of slope 1 per move for d1/qn e
moves. See Figure 5. By Lemma 1 this sequence of pile sizes constitutes a stable
configuration Λ. It is elementary, although somewhat tedious, to verify that the
total amount of cards n0 in this configuration is
                                                                 
                     Z−1
                     X zBi                        B     Z−1    
                                                    i
                                                         X
                n0 =          − (Bi − 1)(Z − i)      +       Bj 
                     i=0
                           q n                     2    j=i+1

where B0 = d 1+z−Z                    1
                  qZ e and Bk = d q(Z−k) e for 1 ≤ k ≤ Z − 1 are the lengths of
the Z sections with constant slope in the configuration Λ. Under the assumptions
nqn2 → C and qn → 0 as n → ∞, it is straightforward (but again somewhat tedious)
to verify that, as n → ∞, we have
                                            Z−1
                                                      !
                       2 0   1 z2 + Z 2 X 1
                      qn n →              −             =C
                             2      Z       i=0
                                                 Z −i

where the equality comes from using the value of z defined in the theorem. The
actual total amount of cards that we play with is n. Thus, the two amounts of cards
n and n0 are asymptotically equal under the assumption nqn2 → C, in which case
the actual stable configuration is asymptotically equal to the stable configuration
Λ described above.
   Let Ai be the length of the ith section, 0 ≤ i ≤ Z − 1, after downscaling Λ with
our standard scaling factors (horizontal scaling by nqzn and vertical scaling by qzn ).
Then
                                     
                       z    1+z−Z          z(1 + z − Z)
               A0 =                     →                and
                     nqn      qn Z              CZ
                                     
                       z        1              z
               Ak =                     →            , 1≤k ≤Z −1
                     nqn qn (Z − k)         C(Z − k)
                                                                                  19

as n → ∞. The proposed slopes of the sections follow immediately. Analogously to
the proof in case (a), it follows that the above describes the limit shape.


      z
     qn

                 slope Z
   Z−1
    qn

                               slope Z − 1
   Z−2
    qn




      1
     qn

                                                                slope 1

      0
          l           ml              m
              1+z−Z            1                            d1/qn e
               qn Z        qn (Z−1)



   Figure 5: The stable configuration Λ in case (c) of the proof of Theorem 5.




9. Limit shapes of recurrent configurations of qn -proportion Bulgarian
   solitaire

Although we have not been able to prove Conjecture 1 for general well-behaved
σ-solitaire, we can prove the conjecture in the special cases of the two main regimes
of qn -proportion solitaire.
Lemma 7. After n moves of qn -proportion solitaire on n cards there are at most
 √                                                                √
2 n nonempty piles and the largest pile is at most of size nq + O( n).

Proof. Every nonempty pile decreases by at least one card in each move. As all
pile sizes are bounded by n, all original piles must have died out after n moves.
                                                                       √
Moreover, because there are n cards in total there are always at most n piles of
                   √          √                                           √
size greater than n. After n moves all other piles will have died and n new
                                                                √
piles will have been created, hence there will then be at most 2 n nonempty piles.
                                                                   √
From then on, when new piles are formed they will have size nq + O( n), where the
latter term is the contribution from the number of picked cards in each pile being
rounded upwards to the closest integer.
                                                                                   20

9.1. The limit shape of recurrent configurations in the case qn2 n → 0
                                                                                 √
In case qn2 n → 0, Lemma 7 implies that after n moves the largest pile size is O( n).
                                                                        √
Then the number of picked cards in each pile is bounded by dqn O( n))e. This
number equals 1 for sufficiently large n. From then on the solitaire is therefore
equivalent to ordinary Bulgarian solitaire. As the recurrent configurations of ordi-
nary Bulgarian solitaire are known to converge to a triangular limit shape, it follows
that the recurrent configurations of qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire do too in this
case.

9.2. The limit shape of recurrent configurations in the case qn2 n → ∞
Finally, we shall prove that in the case qn2 n → ∞, the recurrent configurations of
qn -proportion solitaire have an exponential limit shape. We do this by showing that
regardless of which configuration we start at we must eventually reach configurations
that are close to the exponential shape. Our proof works with piles sorted by time of
creation rather than by size. Thus, as mathematical objects the configurations are
then compositions rather than partitions. However, as we prove in the companion
paper [5], if a sequence of compositions has a decreasing limit shape then the same
limit shape is obtained by the corresponding partitions.
    Lemma 7 implies that after n moves the largest pile is always of size nqn +
    √                                                    √
O( n) = n(qn + o(1)) and that after an additional 2 n moves all non-empty piles
will be stemming from piles of that size. At this point, let αi denote the size of
the pile that was created i moves ago (i = 1, 2, . . . ) and has since been decreased
i − 1 times. Thus αi = (1 − qn )i−1 n(qn + o(1)) − O(i) where the latter term is the
contribution from rounding downward in each move.
    Let x = x(i), x ≥ 0, be the x-coordinate of the column corresponding to αi in
the composition diagram of α, and y the height of this column, after downscaling:

                                            (1 − qn )i−1 n(qn + o(1)) − O(i)
           x = (i − 1)(qn + o(1)),     y=                                    .    (4)
                                                      n(qn + o(1))
                 x
Then i = 1 + qn +o(1) and

                                                                     x
                         (1 − qn )x/(qn +o(1)) n(qn + o(1)) − O( qn +o(1) )
                y(x) =
                                         n(qn + o(1))
                                                               
                                x/(qn +o(1))            x
                     = (1 − qn )             −O
                                                  n(qn + o(1))2
                     = (1 − qn )x/(qn +o(1)) − o(1),

where we used qn2 n → ∞ as n → ∞ in the last step. Since (1 − qn )x/qn → e−x , we
therefore have y(x) → e−x . Recall that qn → 0 as n → ∞. Thus, by (4), for a fixed
i we have x = x(i) → 0 as n → ∞. In other words, the width of each column in the
                                                                                  21

composition diagram for α (after downscaling) is qn + o(1) → 0. This means that
the limit y(x) → e−x holds for any x ≥ 0, which, by the definition (2), establishes
the limit shape for the qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire.
   Finally, thanks to the abovementioned result from [5], the same limit shape is
obtained when the piles of the weak compositions are reordered to form partitions.



10. Discussion

In this paper we have discussed limit shape results for stable and recurrent config-
urations. Popov [11] studied the limit shape of the configurations drawn from the
stationary distribution of a random version of Bulgarian solitaire, in which a card
is picked from a pile only with probability p (and independently of other piles). He
found that also this random version yields a triangular limit shape, in the sense
that the probability of deviations larger than some ε > 0 tends to zero as n tends
to infinity. In a companion paper [5] to the present paper we study a random ver-
sion of qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire and the conditions under which it has an
exponential limit shape.



References

 [1] E. Akin and M. Davis, Bulgarian solitaire, The American Mathematical
     Monthly 92 (1985), no. 4, pp. 237–250.

 [2] H.J. Bentz, Proof of the Bulgarian solitaire conjectures, Ars Combin. 23 (1987),
     151–170.

 [3] J. Brandt, Cycles of partitions, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 85 (1982), no. 3, pp.
     483–486.

 [4] V. Drensky, The Bulgarian solitaire and the mathematics around it,
     arXiv:1503.00885v1 [math.CO] (2015).

 [5] K. Eriksson, M. Jonsson, and J. Sjöstrand, An exponential limit shape of ran-
     dom q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire, arXiv:1703.07102 [math.PR] (2017).

 [6] K. Eriksson and J. Sjöstrand, Limiting shapes of birth-and-death processes on
     Young diagrams, Adv. in Appl. Math. 48 (2012), no. 4, 575 – 602.

 [7] G. Etienne, Tableaux de Young et solitaire bulgare, J. Combin. Theory Ser. A
     58 (1991), no. 2, 181–197.
                                                                                 22

 [8] J.R. Griggs and C.C. Ho, The cycling of partitions and compositions under
     repeated shifts, Adv. in Appl. Math. 21 (1998), no. 2, 205–227.

 [9] B. Hopkins, 30 years of Bulgarian solitaire, College Math. J. 43 (2012), no. 2,
     136–141.

[10] J.S. Olson, Variants of Bulgarian solitaire, Integers 16 (2016), A8.

[11] S. Popov, Random Bulgarian solitaire, Random Structures Algorithms 27
     (2005), no. 3, 310–330.

[12] A. Vershik, Statistical mechanics of combinatorial partitions, and their limit
     shapes, Funct. Anal. Appl. 30 (1996), no. 2, 90–105.
Paper III
AN EXPONENTIAL LIMIT SHAPE OF RANDOM q-PROPORTION
               BULGARIAN SOLITAIRE


                                Kimmo Eriksson
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                      Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                             kimmo.eriksson@mdh.se

                               Markus Jonsson1
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                      Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                             markus.jonsson@mdh.se

                                 Jonas Sjöstrand
            Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Mathematics,
                           SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden
                                  jonass@kth.se




                                      Abstract
We introduce pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire (0 < pn , qn ≤ 1), played
on n cards distributed in piles. In each pile, a number of cards equal to the propor-
tion qn of the pile size rounded upward to the nearest integer are candidates to be
picked. Each candidate card is picked with probability pn , independently of other
candidate cards. This generalizes Popov’s random Bulgarian solitaire, in which
there is a single candidate card in each pile. Popov showed that a triangular limit
shape is obtained for a fixed p as n tends to infinity. Here we let both pn and qn
vary with n. We show that under the conditions qn2 pn n/log n → ∞ and pn qn → 0 as
n → ∞, the pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire has an exponential limit
shape.



1. Introduction

The game of Bulgarian solitaire has received a great deal of attention, see reviews
by Hopkins [10] and Drensky [2]. The Bulgarian solitaire is played with a deck of n
identical cards divided arbitrarily into a number of piles. A move consists of picking
a card from each pile and letting these cards form a new pile. If piles are sorted
  1 Corresponding author
                                                                                       2

in order of decreasing size, every position in the solitaire is equivalent to a Young
diagram of an integer partition of n.
   Popov [15] considered a random version of Bulgarian solitaire defined by a prob-
ability p ∈ (0, 1], such that one card from each pile is picked with probability p,
independently of the other piles. We will refer to this stochastic process on con-
figurations as p-random Bulgarian solitaire. The probabilities of configurations
converge to a stationary distribution. Popov showed that as n grows to infinity and
                                              √
configuration diagrams are downscaled by n in both dimensions, the stationary
probability of the set of configurations that deviate from a triangle with slope p by
more than ε > 0 tends to zero. In this sense, random configurations has a limit
shape.
   The objective of the present paper is to study such limit shapes in a generalization
of random Bulgarian solitaire.

1.1. qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire
Olson [13] introduced a generalization of Bulgarian solitaire in which the number
of cards that are picked from a pile of size h is given by some non-negative valued
function σ(h). Eriksson, Jonsson and Sjöstrand [3] recently studied the special case
when σ is well-behaved in the sense that σ(1) = 1 and both σ(h) and h − σ(h) are
non-decreasing functions of h. In particular, they studied a special case that they
called qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire, defined by the rule σ(h) = dqn he. This
means that from each pile we pick a number of cards given by the proportion qn of
the pile size rounded upward to the nearest integer. To illustrate the effect of the
parameter qn , set it to 0.3 and consider the configuration (6, 2, 2, 1). From the first
pile we pick d0.3 × 6e = 2 cards; similar calculations give that 1 card is picked from
each of the other three piles. Note that for qn ≤ 1/n exactly one card is always
picked from each pile, retrieving the ordinary Bulgarian solitaire.
   As n tends to infinity, Eriksson, Jonsson and Sjöstrand [3] determined limit
shapes of stable configurations of qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire: In case qn2 n → 0,
the limit shape is triangular, which generalizes the limit shape result for the ordi-
nary Bulgarian solitaire. For other asymptotic behavior of qn , other limit shapes
were obtained. Specifically, in case qn2 n → ∞, the limit shape is exponential. The
intermediate case qn2 n → C > 0 produces a family of limit shapes interpolating
between the triangular and the exponential shape.

1.1.1. pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire
We shall examine a pn -random version of qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire, in which
the proportion qn (rounded upward) of cards in a pile are only candidates to be
picked, each of which is picked only with probability pn , independently of all other
candidate cards. This process will be denoted by B(n, pn , qn ). Note that in the
                                                                                                   3

special case of a fixed p and for qn ≤ 1/n, this process is equivalent to Popov’s
p-random Bulgarian solitaire.
   Our focus will be on establishing a regime in which pn -random qn -proportion
Bulgarian solitaire has an exponential limit shape.



2. The concept of limit shapes

In this section we give the precise definitions of the limit shapes we consider. Let
P(n) be the set of integer partitions of n. For any partition λ ∈ P(n) with N = N (λ)
positive parts λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . ≥ λN > 0, define λi = 0 for i > N (λ), and the diagram
of λ as the Young diagram oriented such that the parts of λ are represented by
left and bottom aligned columns, weakly decreasing in height from left to right.
For example,        is the diagram of the partition (2, 1, 1). We define the diagram-
boundary function of λ as the nonnegative, weakly decreasing and piecewise constant
function ∂λ : R≥0 → R≥0 describing the boundary of λ, given by

                                        ∂λ(x) = λbxc+1 .

Following [4] and [16], the diagram is downscaled using some scaling factor an > 0
such that all row lengths are multiplied by 1/an and all column heights are mul-
tiplied by an /n, yielding a constant area of 1. Following [3], we shall consistently
make the choice an = n/λ1 , such that the height of the diagram is scaled to 1.
   Thus, given a partition λ, define the rescaled diagram-boundary function of λ
as the nonnegative, real-valued, weakly decreasing and piecewise constant function
∂λ : R≥0 → R≥0 given by
                                     1               1
                          ∂λ(x) =       ∂λ(xn/λ1 ) =    λbxn/λ1 c+1 .                            (1)
                                     λ1              λ1
   The pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire B(n, pn , qn ) (with pn , qn ∈
(0, 1]) can be regarded as a Markov chain on the finite state-space P(n). Let us
denote the sequence of visited states by (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . ). In the truly random case
of pn < 1, it is straightforward to verify that this Markov chain is aperiodic and
irreducible. It is well-known that an aperiodic and irreducible Markov chain on a
finite state-space has a unique stationary distribution π and that starting from any
initial state the distribution of the ith state λ(i) converges to π as i tends to infinity.
We denote by πn,pn ,qn the stationary measure of the Markov chain (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . )
on P(n) given by B(n, pn , qn ) for pn < 1.2 When we refer to a limit shape of the
   2 Readers acquainted with the limit shape literature may wonder whether the stationary measure

has the property of being multiplicative, in the sense of interpretable as the product measure on the
space of integer sequences restricted to a certain affine subspace [7]. The multiplicative property
is useful in limit shape problems and related problems [1, 5, 8, 14, 16]. However, such techniques
will not be used here as πn,pn ,qn is unlikely to be multiplicative in general.
                                                                                                4

process B(n, pn , qn ) for pn < 1 as n grows to infinity, we shall mean the limit shape
of the stationary measure πn,pn ,qn . The intuitive sense of this concept is that when
the solitaire is played on a sufficiently large number of cards for sufficiently long
the configuration will almost surely be very close to the limit shape after suitable
downscaling. Following Vershik [16], a sequence {πn } of probability distributions
on P(n) is said to have a limit shape φ if the downscaled diagrams approach φ in
probability as n grows to infinity. The exact condition for convergence can vary.
Consistent with Yakubovich [17] and Eriksson and Sjöstrand [4], we shall use the
definition that

                      lim πn {λ ∈ P(n) : |∂ an λ(x) − φ(x)| < ε} = 1                          (2)
                     n→∞

for all x > 0 and all ε > 0.3



3. The approach of ordering piles by time of creation

It will sometimes be useful to explicitly order piles by time of creation rather than
by size. Here we develop this approach.
   When parts are not sorted by size, a configuration is not represented by an integer
partition but by a weak integer composition: an infinite sequence α = (α1 , α2 , . . . ),
not necessarily decreasing, of nonnegative integers adding up to n. Let W(n)
denote the set of weak compositions of n. We define the diagram, the diagram-
boundary function ∂α, and the rescaled diagram-boundary function ∂α of a weak
composition α in exact analogy to the way we defined them for partitions in Sec-
tion 2. For example, the diagram of α = (3, 0, 2, 4, 1, 0, 0, . . . ) and the correspond-
ing function graph y = ∂α(x) are shown in Figure 1. Also, for a weak composition
α = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αN , 0, 0, . . . ) we define the number of parts N = N (α) disregarding
the trailing zeros.

3.1. Connecting the limit shapes of compositions and partitions
We shall now connect compositions with partitions. For any α ∈ W(n), define the
operator ord as the ordering operator that arranges the parts of α in descending
order, thus yielding a partition. We shall now prove that such sorting of the piles
by size respects the convergence to a limit shape. The proof uses some basic theory
    3 Vershik [16] and Erlihson and Granovsky [6] used a stronger condition for convergence toward

a limit shape, namely that
                                (                                      )
                      lim πn    λ ∈ P(n) : sup |∂ an λ(x) − φ(x)| < ε    =1
                     n→∞                   x∈[a,b]

should hold for any compact interval [a, b], and any ε > 0.
                                                                                           5

                  Diagram of α                           Function graph y = ∂α(x)
  y                                               y
   6                                               6
 4                                               4                  t     d

 3                                               3 t     d

 2                                               2             t    d

 1                                               1                        t     d

 0                                     -x        0       t    d                t      -x
     0     1      2     3     4    5                 0   1    2     3     4    5

               Figure 1: The composition α = (3, 0, 2, 4, 1, 0, 0, . . . ) ∈ W(10).


of symmetric-decreasing rearrangements, see for example [9, Ch. 10] or [11, Ch. 3].
For any measurable function f : R → R≥0 such that limx→±∞ f (x) = 0, there is a
unique function f ∗ : R → R≥0 , called the symmetric-decreasing rearrangement of f ,
with the following properties:

     • f ∗ is symmetric, that is, f ∗ (−x) = f ∗ (x) for all x,

     • f ∗ is weakly decreasing on the interval [0, ∞),

     • f ∗ and f are equimeasurable, that is,

                              L({x : f (x) > t}) = L({x : f ∗ (x) > t})

         for all t > 0, where L denotes the Lebesgue measure,

     • f ∗ is lower semi-continuous.

In particular, if f is a symmetric function that is weakly decreasing and right-
continuous on [0, ∞) and tends to 0 at infinity, then f ∗ = f .
Lemma 1. Let α ∈ W(n) be a weak composition of n and let f : R≥0 → R≥0 be
a right-continuous and weakly decreasing function such that f (x) → 0 as x → ∞.
The downscaled diagram-boundary functions before and after sorting of the weak
composition satisfy the inequality

                          k∂ord α − f k∞ ≤ k∂α − f k∞ .
                                               
where k · k∞ denotes the max-norm kf k∞ = sup |f (x)| : x ≥ 0 .

Proof. The intuition of the lemma should be obvious from Figure 2. To be able to
use the standard machinery of symmetric rearrangements, we consider the functions
                                                                                           6

f , ∂α, and ∂ord α as being defined on the entire real axis by letting f (x) = f (|x|)
and analogously for ∂α, and ∂ord α.
    Since f (x) → 0 as x → ∞, its symmetric-decreasing rearrangement f ∗ is defined
and, since f is weakly decreasing and lower semi-continuous, we have f ∗ = f .
Similarly, ∂ord α(x) → 0 as x → ∞ and is weakly decreasing, so (∂ord α)∗ =
∂ord α. Moreover, (∂α)∗ = ∂ord α must hold because the operator ord arranges the
composition parts in descending order.
    Now, since symmetric rearrangements decrease Lp -distances for any 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞
(see for example [11], Section 3.4), we obtain
                     k∂ord α − f k∞ = k(∂α)∗ − f ∗ k∞ ≤ k∂α − f k∞ .


  y                                              y
   6         k∂α − f k∞ ≤ ε                       6         k∂ord α − f k∞ ≤ ε



       s     c                                    s     c
   s   c              s   c   y = f (x) + ε             s       c         y = f (x) + ε
             s   c                                              s   c
                 s    c   s   cy = ∂α(x)                            s     cy = ∂ord α(x)


                              y = f (x) − ε                               y = f (x) − ε
                                        -x                                          -x

Figure 2: An example of a composition α and a decreasing function f showing
that if ∂α(x) is enclosed between f (x) − ε and f (x) + ε, then so is ∂ord α(x), an
immediate consequence of Lemma 1.

  Clearly, Lemma 1 holds true also when the max-norm is replaced by the weaker
convergence condition used in our limit shape definition (2).
Lemma 2. For any distribution πn on W(n), define a corresponding distribution
ρ̃(n) on P(n) by                      X
                          ρ̃(n) (λ) =    πn (α).                          (3)
                                              α∈W(n)
                                              ord α=λ

If φ is a limit shape of πn on W(n) then φ is also a limit shape of ρ̃(n) on P(n).

Proof. The assumption that φ is a limit shape of the distribution πn on W(n) means
that
                 lim πn {α ∈ W(n) : |∂α(x) − φ(x)| < ε} = 1.
                      n→∞
                                                                                    7

for all x > 0. By virtue of Lemma 1 we can replace α with ord α in this formula:

                  lim πn {α ∈ W(n) : |(∂ord α)(x) − φ(x)| < ε} = 1.               (4)
                n→∞

The set A := {α ∈ W(n) : |(∂ord α)(x) − φ(x)| < ε for all x > 0} can be written as
a disjoint union of equivalence classes with respect to sorting:
                               [
                          A=       {α ∈ W(n) : ord α = λ}
                                    λ∈L

where L = {λ ∈ P(n) : |∂λ(x) − φ(x)| < ε for all x > 0}. The πn -probability
measure of A is
                                              !
                      [
          πn (A) = πn   {α ∈ W(n) : ord α = λ}
                             λ∈L
                      X
                  =         πn {α ∈ W(n) : ord α = λ}
                      λ∈L
                      X        X
                  =                     πn (α)
                      λ∈L α∈W(n)
                          ord α=λ
                      X
                  =         ρ̃(n) (λ)                             (by (3))
                      λ∈L

                  = ρ̃(n) (L).

From (4) we have that limn→∞ πn (A) = 1. Because πn (A) = ρ̃(n) (L), we can
conclude that also limn→∞ ρ̃(n) (L) = 1, that is,

             lim ρ̃(n) {λ ∈ P(n) : |∂λ(x) − φ(x)| < ε for all x > 0} = 1.
            n→∞

This means that φ is a limit shape of the distribution πn on P(n).



4. Three regimes

Recall from Section 1.1 the qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire developed in [3], where
the limit shape is triangular when qn2 n → 0, exponential when qn2 n → ∞ and an
interpolation between the two when qn2 n → C > 0.
   The pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire seems to share this property
of three regimes of limit shapes. Specifically, in Section 7 we conjecture the limit
shape to be triangular when pn qn2 n → 0, exponential when pn qn2 n → ∞ and an
interpolation between the two (a piecewise linear function graph that depends on
C) when pn qn2 n → C > 0.
                                                                                     8

   The focus in this paper is the exponential regime of the pn -random qn -candidate
Bulgarian solitaire, i.e. the case pn qn2 n → ∞ as n → ∞. However, with the proof
technique we employ we will prove the stronger statement that the limit shape holds
even when the configurations are considered elements of W(n), i.e. even without
sorting the piles of a configuration according to size to create a partition in P(n).
We will instead require the stronger condition pn qn2 n/log n → ∞ as n → ∞. By
virtue of Lemma 2, the limit shape will also hold for partitions.



5. The exponential limit shape

Here we investigate the limit shape of configurations in the pn -random qn -candidate
Bulgarian solitaire B(n, pn , qn ) in the regime

                              pn qn2 n
                                       → ∞ as n → ∞.                             (5)
                               log n
Our main result, Theorem 1, says that, under the additional asymptotic property
pn qn → 0 as n → ∞, the boundary function of the diagram, downscaled, will
resemble the exponential shape e−x asymptotically almost surely (a.a.s.), i.e. with
a probability that tends to 1 as n → ∞. See Figure 3. Throughout this section,
“a.a.s.” can be read as “with a probability that tends to 1 as n → ∞”. Also, the
asymptotic notations o and O will always be with respect to n → ∞.

        y
  1.2
    1
  0.8
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
    0                                                                            x
        0       0.5          1          1.5          2          2.5          3

Figure 3: The result of a computer simulation after 200 moves of pn -random qn -
proportion Bulgarian solitaire in the case qn = 1, with n = 105 cards and pn = 0.01,
starting from a triangular configuration. The jagged curve is the rescaled diagram-
boundary function of the resulting configuration and the smooth curve is the limit
shape y = e−x .
                                                                                      9

   We shall see that the condition pn qn2 n/log n → ∞ implies that the rounding
effect in computing the number of candidate cards is negligible. Thus, the number
of candidate cards will tend to qn n as n → ∞. This in turn means that the expected
number of picked cards will eventually be close to pn qn n, thus λ1 ≈ pn qn n is the
size of the pile created in a move of the solitaire. Recall from Section 2 that the
scaling factor we employ is an = n/λ1 = pn1qn . Thus, if pn qn is bounded away
from zero, then the scaling pn1qn is bounded and hence cannot transform the jumpy
boundary diagrams into a smooth limit shape. Therefore, we also require

                                pn qn → 0 as n → ∞.                                 (6)

On the other hand, if pn qn tends to zero too fast, the pile sizes will be small and
their random fluctuations will be large. For instance, the new pile after each move
has a size drawn from the binomial distribution Bin(K, pn ), where K ≈ qn n is the
                                                                      √
number of candidate cards, with relative standard deviation ∼ 1/ pn qn n. The
requirement (5) guarantees that pn qn does not tend to zero too fast.

Theorem 1. For each positive integer n, pick qn and pn with 0 < pn , qn ≤ 1 and
a (possibly random) initial configuration λ(0) ∈ P(n). Let (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . ) be the
Markov chain on P(n) defined by B(n, pn , qn ), and denote its stationary measure
by πn,pn ,qn . Suppose

                                        pn qn2 n
                    pn qn → 0    and             →∞    as n → ∞.
                                         log n

Then πn,pn ,qn has the limit shape e−x under the scaling an = (pn qn )−1 .

  The proof of Theorem 1 heavily relies on the following version of Chernoff bounds.
For a proof, see for example [12].

Chernoff Bound. For n ≥ 1 and 0 < p ≤ 1, let X ∼ Bin(n, p) and set µ =
E(X) = np. Then, for any 0 < γ < µ,

                                                γ2
                                                  
                      P (|X − µ| ≥ γ) ≤ 2 exp −      .              (7)
                                                3µ

   The idea of the proof of Theorem 1 is the following.
   We will use the approach developed in Section 3, i.e. card configurations in the
solitaire will be represented by weak integer compositions and the piles are ordered
with respect to creation time, i.e. if α ∈ W(n) is the current configuration in the
solitaire, then α1 was the last formed pile, α2 the pile that was formed two moves
ago, etc. With this representation, some piles may be empty, so one may imagine
each pile being placed in a bowl and the bowls are lined up in a row on the table. In
each move of the solitaire, the new (possibly empty) pile is put in a new bowl to the
left of all old bowls. As mentioned in Section 4, we shall prove Theorem 1 as a limit
                                                                                           10

shape result for diagram-boundary functions of compositions. Thus, throughout this
section, each configuration of n cards will be represented by an element of W(n).
Also, in the following we may abbreviate p = pn and q = qn unless the dependency
on n is crucial.
    Assume a configuration α = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αN , 0, 0, . . . ) of n cards with N = N (α)
                PN
piles (so that i=1 αi = n) in the solitaire B(n, p, q). The number of candidate
                                  PN
cards in the next move is κ := i=1 dqαi e. We denote the rounding effect in pile
1 ≤ i ≤ N by Ri := dqαi e − qαi and the total rounding effect by R := κ − qn =
PN
   i=1 Ri .
    Clearly, R < N (since Ri < 1 for any i), i.e. the total rounding effect is bounded
above by the number of piles. The first thing we will do is to make sure that after a
sufficient number D of moves from the initial configuration α(0) , the number of piles
N (α(D) ) in the resulting configuration α(D) is much smaller than qn a.a.s. (so that
the number of candidate cards κ is approximately qn and thus the total rounding
effect R is negligible). In Lemma 4 we show that it is possible to choose such a D,
namely D = c log   n
                 pq for any c ≥ 14.
    We also need to make sure that the number of piles stays o(qn) for sufficiently
many additional moves M , long enough to establish the convergence of the overall
shape. Lemma 4 will also guarantee that M = dn2 /pe suffices for this purpose.
    Thus, in the following we shall use
                                                              2
                                  log n                           n
                          D = 14              and M =                   .                  (8)
                                    pq                             p
   If the number of piles stays o(qn) during M moves so that the number of can-
didate cards stays approximately qn, the newly formed pile in each of these moves
will have expected size pqn. Our proof technique involves studying the evolution
of such a pile (which will follow an exponential decay in size). Therefore we need
to additionally make sure that no old piles (which could potentially be much larger
than pqn) remain after these M moves. Lemma 3 shows that, in fact, after M
moves all piles in the starting configuration have disappeared a.a.s.
Lemma 3. Let M be given by (8). From any initial configuration α ∈ W(n), after
M moves in the solitaire B(n, pn , qn ), all piles in α have been consumed a.a.s.

Proof. Consider a pile of size n. The size of this pile after M moves is statistically
dominated by max(n−X, 0) where X ∼ Bin(M, pn ) whose expected value is E(X) =
M pn = dn2 /pn epn > n. Therefore, the probability that the pile remains after M
moves is P (X < n) with the bound
                                                               (M pn − n)2
                                                                          
       P (X < n) ≤ P (|X − M pn | > |M pn − n|) ≤ 2 exp −
                                                                 3M pn
                            2             
                               n
                  ≤ 2 exp − (1 + o(1)) ,
                                3
                                                                                         11

where we used the Chernoff bound (7). Thus, since any given pile in α has size ≤ n,
and the number of piles (of any size in any configuration) is ≤ n, the probability
that all piles in α have been consumed after M moves is at least
                                     2            
                                       n
                          1 − 2n exp − (1 + o(1)) → 1
                                       3
which concludes the proof.

Lemma 4. Let n, pn , qn and an initial configuration α(0) be given in the solitaire
B(n, pn , qn ). Then
                1     n                                 o
                   max N (α(D+1) ), . . . , N (α(D+M ) ) → 0 in probability,
              qn n
where D and M are given by (8).

Proof. Let us abbreviate p = pn and q = qn . We will first prove that all piles of size
at most q −1 log n disappear with high probability after D moves, making sure that
there are not many small piles in α(D) . Consider a pile of size at most q −1 log n
in α(0) . Note that every nonempty pile decreases by at least 1 with probability at
least p in each move. Therefore, after D moves the number of picked cards from this
pile statistically dominates X ∼ Bin(D, p) with expected value Dp = 14q −1 log n.
Using the Chernoff bound (7), the probability that this pile remains after D moves
is at most
                                                           
                  log n                                log n
P1 := P X <               ≤ P |X − Dp| > Dp −
                    q                                    q
                              2 
                          log n
              Dp − q                          ( 14 log  n
                                                           − logq n )2
                                                                       !
                                                     q                        132 1
    ≤ 2 exp −                      = 2 exp −                           = 2n− 42 q < 2n−4 .
                                   
                       3Dp                                  log n
                                                    3 · 14 q

Since there can be at most n piles of size at most q −1 log n, the probability that not
all piles of size at most q −1 log n have disappeared after D moves is bounded by

                                   P2 := nP1 = 2n−3 .

   Let us now turn our attention to the number of piles after these D moves. By
the above, all piles smaller than q −1 log n have disappeared with high probability.
Clearly, the number of piles larger than q −1 log n can never be more than q−1 nlog n =
 qn
log n . Also, during the process of these D moves, at most D new piles have been
formed. (Exactly D piles have been formed but some may have disappeared in the
process.) Thus, for the total number of piles N (α(D) ) in the configuration α(D)
after D moves, with probability at least 1 − 2n−3 , we have
                                                                       
          (D)      qn           qn        log n           1       log n
      N (α ) ≤         +D =          + 14       = qn          + 14 2      = o(qn),
                 log n         log n        pq          log n     pq n
                                                                                   12

where we used the assumption (5) in the last step. It follows that, for any ε > 0,
                    1     n                                o
                      max N (α(D+1) ), . . . , N (α(D+M ) ) < ε
                   qn
with probability at least 1 − 2n−3 M ≥ 1 − pn
                                            2
                                              → 1 since pn → ∞. (That pn → 0 is
also a consequence of the assumption (5).)

  Lemma 4 asserts that the number of piles remains to be o(qn) during the M
moves from α(D) to α(D+M ) , hence the number of candidate cards remains to be
qn (a.a.s.) during the same moves. Therefore the number of picked cards (which
equals the size of the newly formed pile), remains of expected size pqn. In Lemma 5
we prove that the actual number of picked cards in each of these M moves does not
deviate (relatively) from pqn.
Lemma 5. Let n, pn , qn and an initial configuration α(0) be given in the solitaire
B(n, pn , qn ). Let D and M be given by (8). Then
                                  (k)
                               |α1 − pn qn n|
                         max                  → 0 in probability
                  k∈[D+1,D+M ]    pn qn n
as n → ∞.

Proof. Let us abbreviate p = pn and q = qn . Let ε > 0 and let κ be the number
of candidate cards in α(k−1) for some k = D + 1, . . . , D + M . Recall that the total
rounding effect in computing the number of candidate cards is bounded above by
the number of piles. It therefore follows from Lemma 4 that κ = nq(1 + o(1)).
                      (k)
The new pile size is α1 ∼ Bin(κ, p). Then, using the triangle inequality and the
Chernoff bound (7) we have
                   (k)                        (k)
        P3 := P (|α1 − pqn| > εpqn) ≤ P (|α1 − κp| > εpqn − |κp − pqn|)
                                              (εpqn − |κp − pqn|)2
                                                                  
                                    < 2 exp −
                                                      3κp
                                             2              
                                              ε
                                    = 2 exp − pqn(1 + o(1))
                                               3
                                        = o(1/M )

where the last equality is derived as follows. By (5), log n = o(pqn) and hence
log na = o(pqn) for any a ≥ 1. Since pqn → ∞, this means that exp(−pqn) tends
to zero faster than exp(− log na ), i.e., exp(−pqn) = o(1/na ). Since np → ∞, we
therefore also have exp(−pqn) = o(p/na ) = o(1/M ). The next to the last equality
follows from the fact that εpqn dominates over |pqn − κp| (since |pqn − κp| =
|pqn − nq(1 + o(1))p| = pqn · o(1)).
                                       (k)
   Therefore, the probability that |α1 − pqn| > εpqn for any k during the entire
process of M moves is bounded by M P3 = M · o(1/M ) = o(1).
                                                                                       13

   While playing the solitaire, there is a possibility that at some point there will be
too many piles, and thereby the number of candidate cards will be bigger than qn
(and thus the size of the newly formed pile will be bigger than pqn). Lemmas 3 and
4 ensures that this never happens a.a.s. during the entire process of M moves from
α(D) to α(D+M ) .
   There is also a risk that, even if there are suitably many (qn) candidate cards,
the number of picked cards among them will deviate from pqn due to random
fluctuations (and thereby the size of the newly formed pile will deviate from pqn).
Lemma 5 ensures that this never happens a.a.s. during the same period of M moves.
   Therefore, after m := D + M moves we have the following a.a.s.
   • all current piles have been formed during the last M moves, and
   • all current piles had size pqn when they were formed.
At this point, i.e. in the configuration Γ := α(m) , the leftmost pile (of size Γ1 ) was
formed one move ago, the second pile from the left (of size Γ2 ) was formed two
moves ago, and so on. We shall prove that the size Γk of the pile that was formed
k moves ago for any k = 1, 2, . . . , m is Γk = Γ1 (1 − pq)k = pqn(1 − pq)k a.a.s., i.e.
the size decreases exponentially with k with decay factor 1 − pq.
    We will now consider the evolution of a given pile of size A1 during r ≥ 1 steps
in the p-random q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire in the following way. We will need
to keep track of each individual card in this pile. To this end, we label the cards
1, 2, . . . , A1 starting from the top, and each card will keep their label throughout
the process. Let Xi,k ∈ {0, 1} where i = 1, . . . , A1 and k = 1, . . . , r be independent
Bernoulli random variables with P (Xi,k = 1) = p.
    Consider the following process. Let Ak+1 be the number of cards after k moves.
In each move k = 1, 2, . . . , r, we remove the card with label i if Xi,k = 1 and this
card belongs to the candidate cards, i.e., the dqAk e top-most remaining cards. We
will call this process a q-process. This process describes the evolution of a pile of
size A1 in the p-random q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire.
    Using the same Bernoulli variables, for any real number 0 ≤ s ≤ 1, we define an
s-threshold process in the following way. In each move k = 1, 2 . . . , r, we remove
                                                                                 [s]
the card with label i if Xi,k = 1 and i ≤ sA1 . In this process, we let Ak+1 denote
the number of remaining cards after k moves. When it is relevant to indicate the
initial pile size, an s-threshold process is called an (s, A1 )-threshold process and the
                                                                [s,A ]
number of remaining cards after k moves is denoted by Ak+11 .
    In the proof of Theorem 1, we will use two different s-threshold processes (for
two different values of s) to over- and underestimate the sizes of r + 1 consecutive
piles in Γ (corresponding to the r steps in an s-threshold process). Both these
processes will have the same desired limit shape and thus the limit shape of our
solitaire will follow by the squeeze theorem. We first need a combinatorial lemma
giving sufficient conditions for overestimation and for underestimation.
                                                                                                           14

                                                        [s]
Lemma 6. (i) If dsA1 e ≤ dqA1 e, then Ak ≥ Ak for k = 1, . . . , r + 1.
                  [s]                      [s]
  (ii) If (1 − q)Ar+1 ≥ A1 − dsA1 e, then Ak ≤ Ak for k = 1, . . . , r + 1.

Proof. (i) A card that is removed at some step ` during the s-threshold process must
have label i ≤ dsA1 e, so in the q-process it belongs to the dqA1 e candidate cards in
the initial pile and hence it belongs to the candidate cards also at step ` and will
be removed. Thus, every card removed in the s-threshold process is removed in the
                                     [s]
q-process too, and it follows that Ak ≥ Ak for k = 1, . . . , r + 1.
   (ii) We show by induction over r that, after r steps, the remaining cards in the
s-threshold process is a subset of the remaining cards in the q-process. Suppose
          [s]                          [s]     [s]                   [s]
(1 − q)Ar+1 ≥ A1 − dsA1 e. Since Ar ≥ Ar+1 we have (1 − q)Ar ≥ A1 − dsA1 e
                                                    [s]
which by the induction hypothesis implies that Ak ≤ Ak for 1 ≤ k ≤ r. It follows
that (1 − q)Ar ≥ A1 − dsA1 e which in turn implies that Ar − (A1 − dsA1 e) ≥ dqAr e.
This latter inequality means that the dqAr e topmost cards before step r in the q-
process all have labels larger than A1 − dsA1 e. Thus, if a card is removed in step
r in the q-process it is also removed in step r or earlier in the s-threshold process.
This concludes the induction step. The base step r = 0 is trivial.

   Recall that we are considering the configuration Γ = α(m) after m = M + D
moves in the solitaire from the initial configuration α(0) . We will compare the sizes
of r + 1 consecutive piles in Γ to the r + 1 pile sizes in an s-threshold process. In
order to make the comparison for all piles in Γ, this will be done for r+1 consecutive
piles (which we will call an r-chunk ) at a time. In each r-chunk the initial pile size
is the corresponding pile size in the solitaire. In other words, Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γr+1 will
be compared to the pile sizes in an (s, Γ1 )-threshold process (with initial pile size
Γ1 ); and Γr+2 , Γr+3 , . . . , Γ2(r+1) will be compared to the pile sizes in an (s, Γr+2 )-
threshold process (with initial pile size Γr+2 ), and so on. Let us call the resulting
union of s-threshold processes an (r, s)-union process. Thus, if we denote the pile
sizes in this (r, s)-union process by U1 , U2 , . . . , we have
                 [s,Γ1 ]                          [s,Γ1 ]                               [s,Γ ]
  U1 = Γ1 = A1             ,               U 2 = A2         ,         ...,   Ur+1 = Ar+11 ,
                           [s,Γr+2 ]                  [s,Γr+2 ]                            [s,Γ   ]
  Ur+2 = Γr+2 = A1                     ,   Ur+3 = A2              ,   ...,   U2(r+1) = Ar+1r+2 , . . . .

   We intend to use the (r, s)-union process to estimate the pile sizes in Γ. In
an s-threshold process, starting with a pile of size A1 , the number of remaining
cards B above the level A1 (1 − s) after r moves is binomially distributed: B ∼
Bin(A1 s, (1 − p)r ). See Figure 4. Therefore we need to choose r = rn and s = sn
in such a way that we have the following in each s-threshold process:

    I The pile size Ak+1 is close to A1 (1 − pq)k a.a.s. for all k = 1, . . . , r, which we
      need to establish the wanted limit shape.
                                                                                                   15

                           A1
                                A2 A
                                     3
                                                   Ar+1
                 A1 s
                                                           B ∼ Bin(A1 s, (1 − p)r )




         A1 (1 − s)




                 Figure 4: The r steps of an (s, A1 )-threshold process.


  II At the same time s must be close enough to q to make the over- and under-
     estimations tight enough.

   To accomplish (I), clearly r = rn can at least not be chosen bigger than 1/pn ,
in fact we shall require pn rn → 0 as n → ∞, in order for the variance in the size
of the last pile (after rn moves) in an s-threshold process to be small with high
probability. However, we shall see that pn rn may not tend to zero too fast. We will
require
                               pn qn2 n  p3 q 2 nr2
                     (pn rn )2          = n n n → ∞ as n → ∞.                   (9)
                                log n      log n
(Recall from (5) that pn qn2 n/log n → ∞.) However, since rn is a positive integer for
any n, if pn 6→ 0 we cannot have pn rn → 0, but will see that rn = 1 suffices in the
case pn 6→ 0. In other words, we will require

                                 pn (rn − 1) → 0 as n → ∞.                                        (10)

   To accomplish (II) we shall see that s = q will suffice for the overestimation and
s = q(1 + 2pr) = q(1 + o(1)) for the underestimation.
   One way of choosing rn such that (9) and (10) are fulfilled is
                              l          m             pn qn2 n
                          rn = ρ−1/3
                                n    p−1
                                      n    where ρn =           .                                 (11)
                                                      1 + log n
                                                             −1/3
This choice fulfills (10) since (rn − 1)pn < rn pn ≤ ρn             → 0. That (9) is fulfilled
is easily verified:
                 2
                                                                                      1/3
                                pn qn2 n         (pn qn2 n)1/3             pn qn2 n
                                                                       
           2 pn qn n
    (pn rn )            > ρ−2/3
                           n             =                         >                         →∞
               log n             log n       (1 + log n)−2/3 log n          log n
                                                                                       16

as n → ∞ by (5).
   Our next lemma, Lemma 7, will bound the probability P 0 that an initial pile of
size In := O(pqn) will, after rn moves in an sn -threshold process, deviate from the
expected size assuming exponential decay, when sn = qn (1 + o(1)).
   Since the number of piles is ≈ (pn qn )−1 , the number of r-chunks is ≈ (pn qn rn )−1 .
When using Lemma 7 we need the bound P 0 to hold for each chunk during all M
moves (where M is given by (8)), specifically P 0 M/(pn qn rn ) → 0 as n → ∞. The
probability in Lemma 7 is therefore bounded by o(pn qn rn /M ) = o(p2n qn rn /n2 ).
This is also why the pile size deviation εnpn qn is scaled with the number of chunks,
resulting in the deviation (εpn qn n)(pn qn rn ) = εp2n qn2 nrn .

Lemma 7. Let (pn )n and (qn )n be real sequences such that 0 < pn , qn ≤ 1 and
pn qn → 0 as n → ∞. For each n, let also Bn ∼ Bin(Fn sn , (1 − pn )rn ) where (Fn )n
and (sn )n are real sequences such that

                      Fn = O(pn qn n)    and    sn = qn (1 + o(1)),                  (12)

and Fn sn is an integer for any n. Let also (rn )n be the sequence of positive integers
in (11). Then, for all ε > 0 we have

       P Bn + Fn (1 − s) − Fn (1 − pn qn )rn > εp2n qn2 nrn = o(p2n qn rn /n2 ).
                                                             


Proof. Let us abbreviate F = Fn , B = Bn , p = pn , q = qn , r = rn and s = sn .
Thus, we want to prove that

         P := P B + F (1 − s) − F (1 − pq)r > εp2 q 2 nr = o(p2 qr/n2 ).
                                                        


We first note that the expected value E(B) = F s(1 − p)r . Using the triangle
inequality |B + F (1 − s) − F (1 − pq)r | ≤ |B − E(B)| + |E − F (1 − pq)r + F (1 − s)|
we obtain

         P ≤ P (|B − E(B)| > εp2 q 2 nr − |E(B) − F (1 − pq)r + F (1 − s)|).

By the Chernoff bound (7) we get

                      (εp2 q 2 nr − |E(B) − F (1 − pq)r + F (1 − s)|)2
                                                                      
         P ≤ 2 exp −                                                     .           (13)
                                           3E(B)

For the indices n for which rn > 1 we have rp ≤ 2(r − 1)p → 0 and hence

           (1 − p)r = 1 − pr + o(pr)    and    (1 − pq)r = 1 − pqr + o(pqr).         (14)

For the indices n for which rn = 1, the relations in (14) are trivially true.
                                                                                      17

  This means

|E(B)−F (1 − pq)r + F (1 − s)| = |F s(1 − p)r − F (1 − pq)r + F (1 − s)|
         = |F s(1 − pr + o(pr)) − F (1 − pqr + o(pqr)) + F (1 − s)|
                                           
         = F pr(q − s) + s · o(pr) + o(pqr)
         = o(F pqr) = o(p2 q 2 nr).                                            (by (12))

Thus the numerator in (13) can be written [(ε + o(1))p2 q 2 nr]2 . By the assumptions
in (12), the denominator in (13) can be written

         3E(B) = 3F s(1 − p)r = 3 · O(pqn) · q(1 + o(1)) · O(1) = O(pq 2 n).

Putting these together, the bound (13) on P can be written

                             O(pq 2 n)
                                                                          
            1                                              1               1
        −       =O                              = O                = o
          log P        [(ε + o(1))p2 q 2 nr]2         p3 q 2 nr2         log n

where (9) was used in the last step. Since pqnr → ∞ (also by (9)) and pqr → 0 (by
                        1                        1
(6) and (10)), we have pqr = o(n) and hence log pqr = o(log n). Therefore
                                                    !                  !
                        1                1                      1
                    −       =o                 1        =o        n        .
                      log P       log n + log pqr            log pqr

From this follows
                                                    p2 qr
                                                         
                                      pqr 
                         log P = o log       = o log 2      ,
                                        n            n
thus P = o(p2 qr/n2 ).

  Note that Lemma 7 concerns an s-threshold process, i.e. only r steps. In other
words, it asserts that

             P Ar+1 − A1 (1 − pn qn )rn > εp2n qn2 nrn = o(p2n qn rn /n2 ),
                                                      
                                                                            (15)

where A1 = O(pn qn n) is the first pile size in an r-chunk and Ar+1 = (1−sn )A1 +Bn
the last (see Figure 4). However, the deviation and the probability were chosen in
such a way that they can be added over all r-chunks. This is done in Lemma 8 which
bounds the probability for deviation for the entire union process. Specifically, we
                                                                 C
will show that, for any C > 0, the piles in Γ formed at most pq     moves ago, i.e. Γk
          C
for k ≤ pq , will follow an exponential decay a.a.s. The sizes of the piles formed
            C                   C
more than pq   moves ago (k > pq   ) will be shown to be sufficiently small to be close
enough to the tail in the exponential limit shape.
                                                                                       18

Lemma 8. Let U1 , U2 , . . . be the pile sizes in an (rn , sn )-union process correspond-
ing to B(n, pn , qn ), where the initial pile size is U1 = O(pn qn n), and rn is given by
(11) and sn = qn (1 + o(1)). Let M = dn2 /pn e. Then

∀C, ε > 0 : ∀k < pnCqn : P (|Uk+1 − U1 (1 − pn qn )k | > εpn qn n) = o(1/M ) = o(pn /n2 ).

Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 7, for the simplicity of notation we do not indicate
in p, q, r and s the dependence on n. Let C, ε > 0 and ε0 = ε/C. By the triangle
inequality,

   |Uk+r+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k+r |
                    ≤ |Uk+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k |(1 − pq)r + |Uk+r+1 − Uk+1 (1 − pq)r |
                    ≤ |Uk+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k | + |Uk+r+1 − Uk+1 (1 − pq)r |.

Lemma 7 is now applicable for the first pile in each r-chunk (since U1 ≥ U2 ≥ · · ·
and U1 = O(pn qn n)), so by its formulation (15), |Uk+r+1 −Uk+1 (1−pq)r | < ε0 p2 q 2 rn
with probability 1 − o(p2 qr/n2 ). Thus,

            |Uk+r+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k+r | < |Uk+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k | + ε0 p2 q 2 rn        (16)

with probability 1 − o(p2 qr/n2 ). We now note that the first term in the right hand
side has the same form as the left hand side, only shifted with r piles. Thus, by
induction it follows that, for any positive integer d, we have

                         |Udr+1 − U1 (1 − pq)dr | < dε0 p2 q 2 rn

with probability 1 − o(p2 qr/n2 ). Thus, adding the probabilities for deviation for
                                    C
k = r, 2r, . . . , ηr, where η = b pqr c we get

        P ∀k ∈ {r, 2r, . . . , ηr} : |Uk+1 − U1 (1 − pq)k | > ηε0 p2 q 2 rn ≥ εpqn
                                                                                  

                                 = η · o(p2 qr/n2 ) = o(p/n2 ).                       (17)

We have thereby proved the claim in the lemma for k = r, 2r, . . . , ηr. If k is not
a multiple of r, suppose dr < k < (d + 1)r for some positive integer d. Then,
since pqr → 0 as n → ∞ (which follows from (5) and (11)), we have (1 − pq)r =
1 − pqr + o(pqr) and hence

    |U1 (1 − pq)(d+1)r − U1 (1 − pq)dr | = O(pqn)(1 − pq)dr |pqr + o(pqr)| < εpqn.

The lemma then follows by (17) and the fact that Udr ≤ Uk ≤ U(d+1)r .
                                                                                                19

6. Proof of Theorem 1

Below follows the proof of Theorem 1, stated in Section 5.

Proof. First, as in the previous section, let us consider B(n, pn , qn ) as a process
on W(n) rather than on P(n), and let α(0) ∈ W(n) be the weak composition
representing the initial configuration of cards in the solitaire. Let also M and D be
given by (8).
   Let (rn )n be the sequence of positive integers given by (11) and let (sn )n be the
sequence sn = qn (1 + 2pn rn ). By Lemma 3 applied on α(D) , all piles present in
                                                             (D+M )
α(D) have disappeared in Γ := α(D+M ) a.a.s. Let Γk = αk             for 1 ≤ k ≤ M be
the number of cards in the pile that was formed k moves ago. By Lemma 5, each of
these piles had size O(npn qn ) a.a.s. when they were formed. Let Fn := O(npn qn )
be a sequence such that Fn sn is an integer for each n. Let 0 < ε < 1 and choose
                      pn qn log ε
Cn such that Cn > log(1−p    n qn )
                                    .
   Let Ǔ1 , Ǔ2 , . . . be the pile sizes in the (rn , sn )-union process with initial pile size
Γ1 . Using the fact that pn qn rn → 0, it is a straightforward computation to show
that sn = qn (1 + 2pn rn ) implies (1 − qn )((1 − pn rn )rn − εpn qn rn ) > 1 − sn and
therefore also

         (1 − qn ) A(1 − pn rn )rn − εApn qn rn > (1 − sn )A for any A > 0.
                                                      

By Lemma 7, the probability that Ǔ1 (1 − pn rn )rn − εǓ1 pn qn rn < Ǔrn +1 is P1 :=
1 − o(p2n qn rn /n2 ). Thus, with probability P1 we have (1 − qn )Ǔrn +1 > (1 − sn )Ǔ1 ≥
Ǔ1 − dsǓ1 e so by Lemma 6(ii), the pile sizes Ǔ1 , Ǔ2 , . . . , Ǔrn +1 in the first r-chunk of
the (rn , sn )-process underestimate the pile sizes Γ1 , Γ2 , . . . , Γrn +1 with probability
P1 . In the next chunk, we have a new absolute threshold sΓrn +2 = sǓrn +2 . Since
Γrn +2 ≤ Γ1 , we have (1 − qn )Ǔ2rn +2 > (1 − sn )Ǔrn +2 with probability at least
P1 , making Lemma 6(ii) applicable also for the second chunk to conclude that
Ǔrn +2 , . . . , Ǔ2rn +2 underestimate Γrn +2 , . . . , Γ2rn +2 with probability at least P1 .
Continuing in the same manner for the first Cn (pn qn rn )−1 chunks, we conclude
that the (rn , sn )-union process underestimates the solitaire with high probability:
                                      Cn
         P (Ǔk > Γk for all k <           ) < (1 − P1 )Cn (pn qn rn )−1 = o(pn /n2 ).
                                     pn qn

   Let Ub1 , U
             b2 , . . . be the pile sizes in the (rn , qn )-union process with initial pile size
Γ1 . By Lemma 6(i) (with sn = qn ), the (rn , qn )-union process surely overestimates
the solitaire in each chunk.
   Taking the results for the (rn , sn )-union process and the (rn , qn )-union process
together we have

                                 bk for all k < Cn ) > 1 − o(p/n2 ).
                   P (Ǔk ≤ Γk ≤ U
                                                pn qn
                                                                                             20

Now, applying Lemma 8 to both the pile sizes Ǔk and to the pile sizes U
                                                                       bk and using
the squeeze theorem, we obtain

        ∀ε > 0 : ∀k < pC n
                       n qn
                            : P (|Γk − Γ1 (1 − pn qn )k | > εnpn qn ) < o(pn /n2 ).

Thus, the probability that |Γk − Γ1 (1 − pn qn )k | < εnpn qn for the first pC n
                                                                             n qn
                                                                                  piles
                                 (D)      (D+M )
throughout all M moves from α        to α        is 1 − M · o(1/M ) = 1 − o(1).
   For piles k > pC n
                  n qn
                       , the exponential decrease  (with decay factor 1 − pq) in pile
                                                           Cn
size will yield piles smaller than npn qn (1 − pn qn ) pn qn < εnpn qn (by our choice of
Cn ). Thus, the pile sizes themselves are below εnpn qn .
   In summary; playing sufficiently many moves of B(n, pn , qn ), the resulting com-
position diagram will a.a.s. be arbitrarily close to the boundary diagram of the
composition α where αk = npn qn (1 − pn qn )k−1 for all k = 1, 2, . . . . The corre-
sponding boundary function is ∂α(x) = npn qn (1 − npn qn )bxc . The corresponding
rescaled boundary function, with the given scaling factor an = (pn qn )−1 , is
                                                       x
                            ∂ an α(x) = (1 − pn qn ) pn qn → e−x

since pn qn → 0 as n → ∞.
   Setting m := D +M , and letting πnm denote the probability distribution on W(n)
for α(m) , we have

                   lim πnm α ∈ W(n) : |∂ an α(x) − e−x | < ε = 1,
                          
                    n→∞

for all ε > 0 and all x > 0, in accordance with (2). By virtue of Lemma 2, the same
limit shape holds when configurations in the solitaire B(n, pn , qn ) are represented
by partitions P(n).
   Since πn,pn ,qn is the stationary distribution of the Markov chain (λ(0) , λ(1) , . . . ), if
we start with a partition λ(0) sampled from πn,pn ,qn and play m moves, the resulting
partition λ(m) will also be sampled from πn,pn ,qn . Thus, the theorem follows by
choosing λ(0) as a stochastic partition sampled from the stationary distribution.



7. Conjectures

Recall that Theorem 1 was proved with B(n, pn , qn ) being considered a process on
W(n), and by virtue of Lemma 2 it also holds in P(n). We imposed the condition
    2
pn qn n                                                        2
 log n → ∞. Here we conjecture that the weaker condition pn qn n → ∞ suffices in
order for Theorem 1 to hold in P(n).

Conjecture 1. Theorem 1 holds also when the condition npn qn2 /log n → ∞ is
replaced by the weaker condition npn qn2 → ∞.
                                                                                    21

   The reason for this conjecture can be understood by considering the example
qn = 1 and pn n = log(log n). For this example it is easy to prove that there is no
limit shape when sorting is not performed. Since qn = 1, the number of picked cards
in each move and thus the expected size of a new pile is Bin(n, pn ) with expected
                                          √
value npn and standard deviation σ ≈ npn . A pile of size npn will after 1/pn
moves have the expected size npn (1 − pn )1/pn → e−1 npn as n → ∞.
                                                                           √
   Thus, the probability for a “visible” deviation (i.e. greater than d = npn stan-
dard deviations) is P (deviation ≥ dσ) = e−npn , so for 1/pn piles, the probability for
                                   −npn
a visible deviation anywhere is e pn = log n log(log
                                                n
                                                     n) → ∞ as n → ∞, i.e. the ex-
pected number of such large deviations tends to infinity as n tends to infinity. This
makes it impossible to achieve a convergence in probability towards a limit shape.
However, from simulations we have reason to believe that the process converges
towards a limit shape when sorting is performed.
   Further, recall from Section 4 the other regimes npn qn2 → 0 and npn qn2 → C from
some constant C > 0. We conjecture that the limit shapes in the pn -random qn -
proportion Bulgarian solitaire in these regimes are the same as in the deterministic
q-proportion Bulgarian solitaire developed in [3].

Conjecture 2. If pn qn2 n → 0 as n → ∞, the limit shape of the pn -random qn -
proportion Bulgarian solitaire is triangular.

Conjecture 3. If pn qn2 n → C as n → ∞ for some constant C > 0, the limit shape
of the pn -random qn -proportion Bulgarian solitaire is a piecewise linear shape that
depends on the value of C.



References

 [1] S. Corteel, B. Pittel, C.D. Savage, and H.S. Wilf, On the multiplicity of parts in
     a random partition, Random Structures Algorithms 14 (1999), no. 2, 185–197.

 [2] V. Drensky, The Bulgarian solitaire and the mathematics around it,
     arXiv:1503.00885v1 [math.CO] (2015).

 [3] K. Eriksson, M. Jonsson, and J. Sjöstrand, Limit shapes of stable configurations
     of a generalized Bulgarian solitaire, arXiv:1703.07099 [math.CO] (2017).

 [4] K. Eriksson and J. Sjöstrand, Limiting shapes of birth-and-death processes on
     Young diagrams, Adv. in Appl. Math. 48 (2012), no. 4, 575 – 602.

 [5] M. Erlihson and B. Granovsky, Reversible coagulation–fragmentation processes
     and random combinatorial structures: Asymptotics for the number of groups,
     Random Structures Algorithms 25 (2004), no. 2, 227–245.
                                                                                   22

 [6]         , Limit shapes of Gibbs distributions on the set of integer partitions:
       The expansive case, Ann. Inst. H. Poincaré Probab. Stat. 44 (2008), 915–945.

 [7] B. Fristedt, The structure of random partitions of large integers, Trans. Amer.
     Math. Soc. 337 (1993), no. 2, 703–735.

 [8] W.M.Y. Goh and P. Hitczenko, Random partitions with restricted part sizes,
     Random Structures Algorithms 32 (2008), no. 4, 440–462.

 [9] G.H. Hardy, J.E. Littlewood, and G. Pólya, Inequalities, Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge, 1934.

[10] B. Hopkins, 30 years of Bulgarian solitaire, College Math. J. 43 (2012), no. 2,
     136–141.

[11] E.H. Lieb and M. Loss, Analysis, volume 14 of graduate studies in mathematics,
     vol. 4, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2001.

[12] M. Mitzenmacher and E. Upfal, Probability and computing: Randomized algo-
     rithms and probabilistic analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[13] J.S. Olson, Variants of Bulgarian solitaire, Integers 16 (2016), A8.

[14] B. Pittel, On a likely shape of the random Ferrers diagram, Adv. in Appl.
     Math. 18 (1997), no. 4, 432–488.

[15] S. Popov, Random Bulgarian solitaire, Random Structures Algorithms 27
     (2005), no. 3, 310–330.

[16] A. Vershik, Statistical mechanics of combinatorial partitions, and their limit
     shapes, Funct. Anal. Appl. 30 (1996), no. 2, 90–105.

[17] Y. Yakubovich, Ergodicity of multiplicative statistics, J. Combin. Theory, Series
     A 119 (2012), no. 6, 1250–1279.
Paper IV
         MARKOV CHAINS ON GRADED POSETS:
  COMPATIBILITY OF UP-DIRECTED AND DOWN-DIRECTED
              TRANSITION PROBABILITIES


                               Kimmo Eriksson
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                     Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                            kimmo.eriksson@mdh.se

                              Markus Jonsson1
    Mälardalen University, School of Education, Culture and Communication,
                     Box 883, SE-72123 Västerås, Sweden
                            markus.jonsson@mdh.se

                                 Jonas Sjöstrand
            Royal Institute of Technology, Department of Mathematics,
                           SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden
                                  jonass@kth.se




                                     Abstract
   We consider two types of discrete-time Markov chains where the state space is a
graded poset and the transitions are taken along the covering relations in the poset.
The first type of Markov chain goes only in one direction, either up or down in the
poset (an up chain or down chain). The second type toggles between two adjacent
rank levels (an up-and-down chain).
   We introduce two compatibility concepts between the up-directed transition
probabilities (an up rule) and the down-directed (a down rule), and we relate these
to compatibility between up-and-down chains. This framework is used to prove a
conjecture about a limit shape for a process on Young’s lattice.
   Finally, we settle the questions whether the reverse of an up chain is a down
chain for some down rule and whether there exists an up or down chain at all if the
rank function is not bounded.
  1 Corresponding author
                                                                                      2

1. Introduction

A Hasse walk is a walk along the covering relations in a poset [9, 10]. In [5], Eriksson
and Sjöstrand discussed how several famous models of stochastic processes can be
regarded as random Hasse walks on Young’s lattice, either walks that go steadily
upwards (e.g. Simon’s model of urban growth) or that alternately go up and down
(e.g. the Moran model in population genetics). The aim of the present paper is to
develop a general framework of such unidirected and alternatingly directed random
Hasse walks on graded posets.
   Let I ⊆ Z be a (possibly infinite) interval of the integers. An I-graded poset Ω
is a countable (or finite) poset together with a surjective map ρ : Ω → I, called the
rank function, such that

   • u < v implies ρ(u) < ρ(v), and

   • u l v implies ρ(v) = ρ(u) + 1,

where u l v means that v covers u, that is u < v but there is no w with u < w < v.
We can partition Ω = i∈I Ωi into its level sets Ωi = ρ−1 (i).
                     S

  We will now describe two types of stochastic processes on Ω.

1.1. Up chains and down chains
An assignment of a probability T (u → v) to any pair (u, v) ∈ Ω × Ω is an up rule if

   • T (u → v) > 0 ⇔ u l v, and
     P
   •    v∈Ω T (u → v) = 1 for any u with non-maximal rank.

Analogously, it is a down rule if

   • T (u → v) > 0 ⇔ u m v, and
     P
   •    v∈Ω T (u → v) = 1 for any u with non-minimal rank.

Throughout, we shall use U and D to denote an up rule and a down rule, respec-
tively.

Example 1. Figure 1 shows an example of a [0, 2]-graded poset with two sets of
probabilities forming an up rule (left) and a down rule (right).

   Up rules and down rules define classes of Markov chains on Ω. We will consider
such Markov chains (Xi )i∈J on Ω for any (possibly infinite) subinterval J ⊆ I.
                                                                                       3


          3      1          2      3                       3            1
          4      4          5      5                1      4            4   1

                 7          3
                10          10                             1            1


          Figure 1: An up rule (left) and a down rule (right) on some Ω.


Definition 1. Let U be an up rule and let D be a down rule on an I-graded poset
Ω. A Markov chain (Xi ∈ Ωi )i∈J is a U -chain (with time interval J) if

               Prob(Xi = u and Xi+1 = v) = Prob(Xi = u)U (u → v)                     (1)

for any non-maximal i ∈ J and any u, v ∈ Ω. Analogously, it is a D-chain if

               Prob(Xi = u and Xi−1 = v) = Prob(Xi = u)D(u → v)                      (2)

for any non-minimal i ∈ J and any u, v ∈ Ω.
   A U - or D-chain is maximal if its time interval is I, and it is positive if Prob(Xi =
u) > 0 for any i ∈ J and any u ∈ Ωi .
   In this paper we shall examine when an up rule and a down rule are compatible
with each other. We shall distinguish between a weaker and a stronger notion of
compatibility.
Definition 2. An up rule U and a down rule D on Ω are compatible if there is a
maximal U -chain (Xi ∈ Ωi )i∈I and a maximal D-chain (Yi ∈ Ωi )i∈I such that, for
any i ∈ I, the random variables Xi and Yi are equally distributed.
   U and D are strongly compatible if there is a Markov chain that is both a maximal
U -chain and a maximal D-chain.
Example 2. Let U and D be the up and down rules depicted in Figure 2. Clearly,
U and D are compatible — just assign the probability 1/2 to each element in the
poset. But they are not strongly compatible since the probability of going diagonally
is 3/4 for the up rule and 1/4 for the down rule.
  In order to study probability distributions on the poset Ω we introduce some
notation.
  Let `1 (Ω) denote the Banach space of real-valued functions f on Ω such that the
             P
norm kf k = u∈Ω |f (u)| is finite. Let

                     `1 (Ωi ) = {f ∈ `1 (Ω) : f −1 (R \ {0}) ⊆ Ωi }

denote the subspace consisting of functions with support on the level set Ωi and let
                                                             X
       M (Ωi ) = {π ∈ `1 (Ωi ) : π(u) ≥ 0 for any u ∈ Ωi and      π(u) = 1}
                                                                 u∈Ωi
                                                                                      4

                                        3       3
                                        4       4


                           1                                1
                           4                                4
                               3                        3
                               4                        4

                                    1               1
                                    4               4




Figure 2: The up rule (bent arrows) and the down rule (straight arrows) are com-
patible but not strongly compatible.


denote the set of probability distributions on Ωi .
   An up or down rule T induces a linear operator (which, by abuse of notation,
also is called T ) on `1 (Ω) defined by
                                        X
                             (T π)(v) =    T (u → v)π(u).
                                        u∈Ω

Stepwise application of this operator defines sequences of probability distributions
with support on one level set at a time, as follows.
Definition 3. Let U be an up rule and let D be a down rule on an I-graded poset
Ω. A sequence (πi ∈ M (Ωi ))i∈J for some (possibly infinite) interval J ⊆ I is a
U -sequence if U πi = πi+1 for any non-maximal i ∈ J, and it is a D-sequence if
Dπi = πi−1 for any non-minimal i ∈ J.
   A U - or D-sequence (πi )i∈J is positive if πi (u) > 0 for any i ∈ J and any u ∈ Ωi .
  Clearly, there is a one-to-one correspondence between U -sequences and U -chains
and between D-sequences and D-chains.
Observation 1. U and D are compatible if and only if there exists a U -sequence
that is also a D-sequence.

1.2. Up-and-down processes
Next we turn to alternatingly directed Markov chains on Ω.
   Given an up rule U and a down rule D, we define a UD-chain as a Markov chain
with state space Ω and with transitions induced by U and D alternately.
Definition 4. Let U be an up rule and let D be a down rule on an I-graded poset
Ω. A UD-chain is a Markov chain (X (0) , X (1) , . . . ) on Ω such that
                                   (
         (t)          (t+1)          Prob(X (t) = u)U (u → v) if t is even
  Prob(X = u and X          = v) =                                          (3)
                                     Prob(X (t) = u)D(u → v) if t is odd
                                                                                        5

for any u, v ∈ Ω.

  Figure 3 depicts the level sets Ω1 = {u1 , u2 } and Ω2 = {v1 , v2 , v3 } of the poset
Ω in Figure 1 with the same up rule U and down rule D. The up rule U and the
down rule D define a UD-chain with state space Ω1 ∪ Ω2 .

             v1                             v2                            v3
                         3        1                    2        3
                         4        4                    5        5


                    1                   3        1                    1
                                        4        4
                             u1                            u2

                                  Figure 3: A UD-chain.


1.3. Results
Our first result relates the UD-process to the compatibility of U - and D-chains.
We state this as two theorems, one about strong compatibility and one about com-
patibility. These theorems follow almost immediately from the definitions, but
nevertheless they can be powerful tools. In Section 2 we use Theorem 2 to prove a
conjecture of Eriksson and Sjöstrand [5] about the limit shape of a Markov process
on Young’s lattice.

Theorem 1. Let Ω be an I-graded poset with an up rule U and a down rule D,
and let (Xi ∈ Ωi )i∈I be a Markov chain. The following are equivalent.

 (a) (Xi )i∈I is both a U -chain and a D-chain (and hence U and D are strongly
     compatible).

 (b) For any adjacent levels i, i + 1 ∈ I it holds that Xi , Xi+1 , Xi , Xi+1 , . . . is a
     UD-chain.

Proof. In the sequence (Xi , Xi+1 , Xi , Xi+1 , . . . ) the even-indexed and odd-indexed
variables are Xi and Xi+1 , respectively. The two cases in (3) in Definition 4 with
t = i for even t and t = i + 1 for odd t are equivalent to (1) together with (2) in
Definition 1.

  In other words, Theorem 1 says that if and only if random variables can be defined
on each level set such that they correspond both to a Markov chain following the
up rule and a Markov chain following the down rule, they also correspond to all
Markov chains following the up and down rule alternatingly.
                                                                                        6

Theorem 2. Let Ω be an I-graded poset with an up rule U and a down rule D,
and let (πi ∈ M (Ωi ))i∈I be a sequence of probability distributions. The following
are equivalent.
 (a) (πi )i∈I is both a U -sequence and a D-sequence (and hence U and D are com-
     patible).
 (b) For any adjacent levels i, i + 1 ∈ I it holds that (πi + πi+1 )/2 is a stationary
     distribution of the UD-process.

Proof. Note that (πi + πi+1 )/2 is a stationary distribution of the UD-process if
and only if U πi = πi+1 and Dπi+1 = πi . Now the theorem follows directly from
Definition 3 (with J = I).

  In words, Theorem 2 says that a given sequence of probability distributions is
both a U -sequence and a D-sequence if and only if the average (in `1 (Ω)) of two
adjacent such distributions is a stationary distribution of the UD-process.
  The second part of this paper will answer the following questions that arise
naturally from the notion of compatibility.
 Q1. Given an up rule U and a U -chain (Xi ), is there a down-rule D such that (Xi )
     is a D-chain?
 Q2. Given an up or down rule T , is there a maximal T -chain?
   The answer to Q1 is that every positive U -chain is a D-chain for some D. This is
Theorem 3 in Section 3 and we give a constructive proof using Bayesian updating
of probability distributions between adjacent levels.
   The answer to Q2 is more complex and is presented as three theorems in Section 4.
If all level sets Ωi are finite, it turns out that there always exists a T -chain, but not
necesserily a positive one. The proofs rely on topological arguments and require the
axiom of choice.

1.4. Applications
We will apply the results to processes on two particular posets: (i) Young’s lattice;
and (ii) the d-dimensional nonnegative integer lattice.
   In [5], Eriksson and Sjöstrand study stochastic processes on Young diagrams of
integer partitions, in particular their limit shapes. In the framework of this paper,
these processes are up processes and up-and-down processes, respectively, where
the underlying poset is Young’s lattice. A motivation for this work is a limit shape
conjecture in [5] for a certain up-and-down process (described in Section 1.5 below).
Using the results in the current paper, in particular Theorem 2, we will prove this
conjecture. This is done in Corollary 2 in Section 2.
   Applications of our theory to the d-dimensional nonnegative integer lattice are
presented in Section 3.1.
                                                                                      7

1.5. An application of Theorem 2 to a process on Young’s lattice
One of the processes studied in [5], called derow-row(µ), is a UD-chain on Young’s
lattice. We will first introduce some notation for integer partitions and Young
diagrams and then describe the up rule row(µ) and the down rule derow used in
this process.

1.5.1. Notation
An introduction to the theory of integer partitions can be found in [1].
    With Pn we mean the set of all partitions of the positive integer n. For λ ∈ Pn ,
we write |λ| = n. Denote the parts of the partition by λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λN ) where
λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λN and N = N (λ) is the number of parts of λ. Let ri = ri (λ) ≥ 0
                                                       Pn                    PN
denote the number of parts of size i. Thus, N =           i=1 ri and n =        i=1 λi =
Pn
      ir
   i=1 i .
    An integer partition λ can be represented by a Young diagram drawn as left-
aligned rows of squares in the first quadrant such that the ith row from the bottom
has length λi . The diagrams in the first three levels of Young’s lattice can be seen
in Figure 4. With λ ∈ Pn we mean either the partition or its corresponding Young
diagram.




                              Figure 4: Young’s lattice.


1.5.2. Description of the process
To describe the UD-chain derow-row(µ), we need to associate squares with row-
lengths and row-lengths with corners in a Young diagram as follows.
                                                                                    8

Definition 5. See Figure 5. Consider some given Young diagram λ. For any of
its squares s let κ(s) denote the length of the row to which s belongs. If κ is a
row length, let ω(κ) and ι(κ) denote the unique outer corner and inner corner,
respectively, for which the row coordinate is κ:

                     ω(κ) = (κ, max{i | λi = κ}) ,
                            (
                              (κ, max{i | λi > κ}) if κ < λ1
                     ι(κ) =                                  .
                              (λ1 , 0)             if κ = λ1

                          y
                           6
                          4c s

                          3         c               s

                          2
                          1                         c         s

                          0                                   c -x
                              0     1    2    3     4    5    6

Figure 5: Inner and outer corners in the Young diagram of the partition λ =
(6, 4, 4, 1). The outer corners (filled circles) are from left to right ω(1), ω(4) and
ω(6). The inner corners (unfilled circles) are from left to right ι(0), ι(1), ι(4) and
ι(6).

   Consider a current Young diagram λ. The action of the down rule derow is
defined by choosing a non-empty row i uniformly at random and removing the
corresponding outer corner ω(λi ).
   The action of the up rule row(µ) is defined as follows: With probability µ create
a new row of length 1. Otherwise make a uniformly random choice of a row i among
the N (λ) non-empty rows and insert a new square at the corresponding inner corner
ι(λi ). See Definition 5.
   The process derow-row(µ) is the up-and-down process on Pn (for some n ≥ 2)
using these up and down rules.

1.5.3. The stationary distributions
Lemma 1. For any 0 < µ < 1, the stationary distribution over the partitions in
Pi ∪ Pi+1 in the process row-derow(µ) is

                                  1                            N (λ)!
                   πiUD (λ) =       (1 − µ)|λ|−N (λ) µN (λ)−1 Q          .        (4)
                                  2                            k rk (λ)!
                                                                                     9

Proof. In [5] (equations (12) and (13)) it is proved that, up to a normalization
constant, πiUD (λ) is given by
                           µ
                              N (λ)         (
              UD          1−µ        N (λ)!    1
                                                 ci          if |λ| = i + 1,
             πi (λ) =       Q               · 21                             (5)
                              k rk (λ)!          c
                                               2 i  /(1 − µ) if |λ| = i.
for some constant ci (independent of λ). It follows that ci+1 /(1 − µ) = ci for each i,
and since c1 = (1 − µ)2 /µ we must have ci = (1 − µ)i+1 /µ. Inserting this expression
for ci in (5) yields (4).

   Combining the lemma with Theorem 2 yields a formula for the distributions of
the U -chain induced by the up rule row(µ).
Corollary 1. The up rule row(µ) and the down rule derow are compatible and
the distribution of the row(µ) process on Pi is given by the probability function
                                                      N (λ)!
                      p(λ) = (1 − µ)i−N (λ) µN (λ)−1 Q           .
                                                       k rk (λ)!

   In fact the derivation of equations (12) and (13) in [5] reveals that the stationary
derow-row(µ) process is reversible, and hence, by Theorem 1, row(µ) and derow
are strongly compatible.



2. Limiting objects

The original motivation for the current work has been the study of limiting objects,
in particular limit shapes of Young diagrams under stochastic processes as initiated
in [5]. As a corollary to Theorem 2, we can now prove a limit shape conjecture in
[5] (Conjecture 2).
   First, let us remind ourselves what is meant by a scaling of a Young diagram.
As the number of squares n grows we need to rescale the diagram to achieve any
limiting behaviour. Following [5] and [11], a diagram is rescaled using a scaling
factor an > 0 such that all row lengths are multiplied by 1/an and all column
heights are multiplied by an /n, yielding a constant diagram area of 1.
Corollary 2. Let µn log(µn n) → 0 and µn n → ∞ as n → ∞ and choose the scaling
an = 1/µn . Then the stationary distribution of the derow-row(µn ) process has
the limit shape
                                  y(x) = e−x .

Proof. By Corollary 1, the stationary distribution for derow-row(µ) equals the
distribution for row(µ). By Theorem 4 in [5], the limit shape for this distribution
with µ = µn is y = e−x as long as µn log(µn n) → 0 and µn n → ∞ as n → ∞.
Therefore, under these conditions the limit shape for derow-row(µn ) must also
be y = e−x .
                                                                                      10

2.1. The asymptotics of µn in derow-row(µn )
Theorem 4 in [5] has the conditions µn n → ∞ and µn log(µn n) → 0 as n → ∞.
After scaling a Young diagram with scaling factor an = 1/µn , each square will have
width 1/an = µn and height an /n = µn1 n . In order for the boundary of the Young
diagram (which is the object whose limiting behaviour one considers) to resolve
properly as n → ∞, we must at least have

                        µn → 0 and µn n → ∞ as n → ∞.                                (6)

However, Theorem 4 in [5] uses the stronger assumption µn log(µn n) → 0 as n → ∞.
Whether this can be relaxed in Corollary 2 is an open problem.

2.2. A generalization of limiting objects
One may also generalize the concepts of limiting object and limit distribution. In
order to be able to talk about a generic process having a limiting object and a limit
distribution, let S be a separable metric space, called a limit space, with the metric
dS .
   For n = 0, 1, . . . let Rn be the countable set of states reachable after n steps, and
let fn : Rn → S be a “scaling” function. A stochastic process (Xn ∈ Rn )∞     n=0 having
a limit distribution (with respect to the metric dS ) corresponds to the convergence
of the random variables {fn (Xn )} in distribution to a random variable X ∈ S; the
distribution of X is the limit distribution.
   Further, if the limit distribution has all probability mass concentrated in a single
point in S, in other words, if X is constant, then this point is the limiting object of
the process (in which case we may equivalently talk about convergence in probability
of {fn (Xn )} to the limiting object).
   In this paper, we have made this concept tangible by studying processes on
Young’s lattice, where the limit space is the set of decreasing functions in the first
quadrant with integral 1. In the next section, we will study processes on the d-
dimensional nonnegative integer lattice Nd where the limit space is the set of non-
negative real d-tuples adding to 1. We see a further possible application to this
generalization in the study of limits of permutation sequences (see for example [7]).
In this case S is the set of Lebesgue measurable functions [0, 1]2 → [0, 1] with certain
properties.



3. Given an up rule, is there a compatible down rule?

In this section we will prove the existence of a down rule compatible with a given up
rule. The proof is constructive and we will use the construction in some examples.
                                                                                                    11

Theorem 3. Let U be an up rule on an I-graded poset Ω, and let (Xi )i∈I be
a U -chain. Then (Xi ) is a D-chain for some down rule D on Ω if and only if
Prob(Xi = u) = 0 implies Prob(Xi+1 = v) = 0 for any i, i + 1 ∈ I and any
Ωi 3 u l v ∈ Ωi+1 . In particular this holds when (Xi ) is positive.

Proof. By Theorem 1, (Xi ) is a D-chain if and only if Xi , Xi+1 , Xi , Xi+1 , . . . is a
UD-chain for any i ∈ I. Since Xi , Xi+1 , Xi , Xi+1 , . . . is a reversible Markov chain
(see any text book on Markov chains, for instance [8]), it is a UD-chain if and only
if Prob(Xi = u)U (u → v) = Prob(Xi+1 = v)D(v → u) for any u, v ∈ Ω. A D
satisfying that equation can be chosen by letting

                                            Prob(Xi = u)U (u → v)
                            D(v → u) =                                                             (7)
                                               Prob(Xi+1 = v)

but this is possible only unless Prob(Xi = u) = 0 and Prob(Xi+1 = v) > 0 for some
u l v or Prob(Xi = u) > 0 and Prob(Xi+1 = v) = 0 for some u l v. The latter is
impossible since Prob(Xi+1 = v) ≥ Prob(Xi = u)U (u → v).

3.1. Processes on the d-dimensional nonnegative integer lattice
In this section we will demonstrate two applications of Theorem 3 on the d-dimensional
nonnegative integer lattice Nd . We will construct down rules compatible with given
up rules. We shall also see examples of processes both with and without a limiting
object.

3.1.1. The lattice Nd
For a positive integer d, let (Nd , ≤) be the poset of nonnegative integer d-tuples
(x1 , . . . , xd ) ordered component-wise, i.e. for x = (x1 , . . . , xd ), y = (y1 . . . , yd ) ∈ Nd ,
we have x ≤ y if xi ≤ yi for all i = 1, . . . , d. For x, y ∈ Nd , we have

                        x ∨ y = (max(x1 , y1 ), . . . , max(xd , yd )) and
                        x ∧ y = (min(x1 , y1 ), . . . , min(xd , yd )),

so Nd is a lattice, which we will refer to as the d-dimensional nonnegative integer
lattice.
   Obviously, Nd is graded with the rank function
                                                    d
                                                    X
                                            |x| =         xj
                                                    j=1


and for n ≥ 0, the level set Ndn = {x ∈ Nd : |x| = n} is the set of weak compositions
of n.
                                                                                                      12

3.1.2. A limiting object on Nd
As an analogy to the concepts of limit shapes for birth- and birth-and-death pro-
cesses on Young diagrams we will here define a limiting object for processes on
Nd .
   If we divide the coordinates of a lattice point reached in an up process on Nd
by the number of steps taken in the process, the result is a point in the (d − 1)-
dimensional simplex ∆d−1 = {(x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ [0, 1]d | x1 + · · · + xd = 1}. Under this
scaling we define a limiting object as follows.

Definition 6. For an up process on Nd , let Xn = (Xn1 , . . . , Xnd ) be the lattice point
after n steps. A point x ∈ ∆d−1 is a limit point of the up process if for any ε > 0
we have
                          lim Prob n1 Xn − x < ε = 1.
                                                   
                                 n→∞


3.1.3. Notation
For x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ Nd , let

                               x(i) = (x1 , . . . , xi − 1, . . . , xd ) and
                               x(i) = (x1 , . . . , xi + 1, . . . , xd )

for i = 1, . . . , d. An up process on Nd starts at (0, . . . , 0). In each step, the up rule U
increases the rank of the current state by 1, i.e. increments exactly one component.
Thus, U is determined by the probabilities U (x → x(i) ) for i = 1, . . . , d.
   For n ∈ N, let pn : Ndn → [0, 1] be the probability function on Ndn induced by the
up rule U .

3.1.4. An up process on Nd with a limiting object
Consider the up rule U on Nd governed by the constant transition probabilities
U (x → x(i) ) = νi . We may use Theorem 3 to conclude that there is a down rule D
compatible with U . Let us construct it!
   First of all, the probability to reach x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) (after n = |x| steps in the
up process induced by U ) is clearly

                                                           n!
                           pn (x1 , . . . , xd ) =                   ν1 x1 · · · νd xd .
                                                     x1 ! · · · xd !
As a consequence,

                                            (n − 1)!
                pn−1 (x(i) ) =                                   ν1 x1 · · · νi xi −1 · · · νd xd .
                                 x1 ! · · · (xi − 1)! · · · xd !
                                                                                        13

We use (7) to compute the transition probability D(x → x(i) ) from x ∈ Ndn to
x(i) ∈ Ndn−1 :

                          pn−1 (x(i) )U (x(i) → x)   pn−1 (x(i) )νi   xi   xi
         D(x → x(i) ) =                            =                =    =     .
                                   pn (x)               pn (x)        n    |x|

Here we see that an up rule employing the degree of freedom parameters ν1 , . . . , νd
has a compatible down rule with no such degree of freedom present. As we saw in
Corollary 1, this is also the case with the up rule in the process row(µ) having a
compatible down rule derow, void of the degree of freedom parameter µ.

Proposition 1. The up process on Nd using the up rule U (x → x(i) ) = νi has the
limit point (ν1 , . . . , νd ).

Proof. For this process we have Prob(Xni = k) = nk ν k (1 − ν)n−k for i = 1, . . . , d,
                                                    

i.e. Xni ∼ Bin(n, νi ), which means E(Xni )/n = νi . Thus, the limit point is the
d-tuple (ν1 , . . . , νd ).

3.1.5. An up process on Nd without a limiting object
We will now consider an up process on Nd starting at (0, . . . , 0) induced by an up
rule that depends on the current level.

Proposition 2. The process on Nd induced by the up rule U governed by the tran-
sition probabilities
                                              xi + 1          xi + 1
                      U (x → x(i) ) =                       =                          (8)
                                        x1 + . . . + xd + d   |x| + d

has a uniform distribution on Ndn , for all n ≥ 0.

Proof. We prove this by induction over       the number of steps n in the process. First
of all we observe that |Ndn | = d+n−1 d−1 .
   For n = 0, we have a trivial uniform distribution.
   For n ≥ 0, assume that the distribution on Ndn under this process is uniform, i.e.,
                               −1
pn (x) = |Ndn |−1 = d+n−1 d−1      for all x ∈ Ndn . We want to prove that the distribution
                                                                   −1
over Ndn+1 is also uniform, i.e., pn+1 (x) = |Ndn+1 |−1 = d+n  d−1     .
   Let x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ Ndn+1 be a fixed element. Of course |x| = n + 1. Now, x
can be reached from any of the elements x(1) , . . . , x(d) ∈ Ndn . By (8),

                                           (xj − 1) + 1    xj
                        U (x(j) → x) =                  =     ,
                                            |x(j) | + d   n+d
                                                                                           14

                                                      d+n−1 −1
                                                           
and by the induction hypothesis, pn (x(j) ) =          d−1     , so the probability pn+1 (x)
for x ∈ Ndn+1 is

                       d
                       X
        pn+1 (x)   =         pn (x(j) )P (x(j) → x)
                       j=1
                            −1 Xd
                        d+n−1          xj
                   =
                         d−1     j=1
                                     n +d
                                                                                −1
                        (d − 1)!n!(n + 1)    (d − 1)!(n + 1)!              d+n
                   =                       =                  =                        ,
                       (d + n − 1)!(n + d)       (n + d)!                  d−1

so the distribution is uniform also on Ndn+1 , and the result follows by induction.

   Since the distribution is uniform, this process cannot have a limiting object.
   As in Section 3.1.4, let us use (7) to construct the down rule compatible with the
up rule in Theorem 2. We get the probability D(x → x(i) ) for moving from x ∈ Ndn
to x(i) ∈ Ndn−1 by

                             pn−1 (x(i) )P (x(i) → x)
      D(x → x(i) )     =
                                      pn (x)
                              d+n−2 −1      xi      d+n−1
                                                         
                               d−1      n−1+d           d−1     xi       xi   xi
                       =                        =                      =    =     .
                                 d+n−1 −1              d+n−2 n − 1 + d        |x|
                                                            
                                      
                                                        d−1
                                                                         n
                                  d−1




4. Given an up or down rule T , is there a maximal T -chain?

Let T be an up or down rule on an I-graded poset Ω. Recall that there is a one-
to-one correspondence between T -chains and T -sequences, so questions about the
existence of maximal T -chains are equivalent to questions about the existence of
maximal T -sequences.
   If I has a minimal element m there obviously exists a maximal U -sequence for
a given up rule U : Just choose any probability distribution πm ∈ M (Ωm ) on level
m, and the up rule U will induce a U -sequence (U i−m πm )i∈I . However, if I has no
lower bound it is not obvious whether there exists a maximal U -sequence, and, by
symmetry, if I has no upper bound it is not obvious whether there exists a maximal
D-sequence for a given down rule D. Here is an example where no such D-sequence
exists.

Example 3. Let Ω be the two-dimensional integer lattice Z2 with the partial order
(x, y) ≤ (x0 , y 0 ) if x ≤ x0 and y ≤ y 0 . It is Z-graded by ρ(x, y) = x + y. Let D be
the down rule with probability 1/2 for each edge in the Hasse diagram. If we start
                                                                                       15

at any element of high rank n and follow down edges randomly according to the
down rule, the chance of hitting any particular element of rank zero is very small;
it tends to zero as n grows. Thus, in a maximal D-sequence any rank-zero element
must be given the probability zero, which is impossible.

   The phenomenon in the above example cannot happen if the level sets Ωi are
finite, and, as we will see in Theorem 6, in this case there is always a maximal
T -sequence. As the following example reveals, however, the existence of a positive
maximal T -sequence is not guaranteed.

Example 4. Look at the two-dimensional nonnegative integer lattice N2 with the
down rule given by the probability 1/2 at every edge in the Hasse diagram, except
for the leftmost and rightmost edges which must have probability one; see Figure 6.
If we start at any element of high rank n and follow down edges randomly according
to the down rule, with very high probability we will walk into the left or right border
before we reach level 2. Thus, the probability of reaching the middle element (1, 1)
at level 2 tends to zero as n grows. This means that every D-chain (Xi ) must have
Prob(X2 = (1, 1)) = 0.



                                 1          1   1       1
                         1       2          2   2       2        1

                                        1           1
                                 1      2           2   1

                                        1           1


                    Figure 6: The down rule on N2 in Example 4.

   We will present three theorems about the existence of T -sequences and positive
T -sequences. Their proofs all depend on the following lemma.

Lemma 2. Let T be an up or down rule on an I-graded poset Ω. Let (Ci ⊆
M (Ωi ))i∈I be a sequence of compact sets and suppose for any m ≤ n in I there exists
a T -sequence (πi0 ∈ Ci )i∈[m,n] . Then there exists a maximal T -sequence (πi ∈ Ci )i∈I .

Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that T = U is an up rule.
                                    Q
  Let Π be the product space Π = i∈I Ci . For any non-maximal k ∈ I, let

                             Πk := {(πi ) ∈ Π | U πk = πk+1 }.

Let us first show that the set Πk is closed.
                                                                                     16
                                                     Q
   Clearly, Πk is homeomorphic to the product of i∈I\{k,k+1} Ci and the graph
G ⊆ Ck × Ck+1 of the restriction of U to Ck ∩ U −1 Ck+1 . The map U has operator
norm 1, so it is continuous. Hence, the preimage U −1 Ck+1 is closed and so is
Ck ∩ U −1 Ck+1 . It follows that the graph G is closed and hence Πk is closed, being
homeomorphic to a product of closed sets.
   By Tychonoff’s theorem Π is compact, and therefore the closed subsets Πk are
compact, and so is the intersection Λ of all Πk . Clearly, Λ is precisely the set of
maximal U -sequences, so our task is to show that Λ is nonempty. To that end,
                                                       S          T
suppose it is empty and define Uk = Π \ Πk . Then Uk = Π \ Πk = Π so the
family of all sets Uk is an open cover of Π. Since Π is compact there is an open
subcover {Uk }k∈F , where F is a finite set of non-maximal elements in I. Choose
m and n in I so that m ≤ k < n for any k ∈ F . Now, by the assumption in
the theorem there is a U -sequence (πi0 ∈ Ci )i∈[m,n] For i ∈ I \ [m, n], let πi0 be
an arbitrary element in Ci . The sequence (πi0 )i∈I so obtained is a point outside
           S
the union k∈F Uk , which contradicts the fact that {Uk }k∈F covers Π. Hence, our
supposition that Λ is empty is false.

   Our first existence theorem states that if there exists a T -sequence for any finite
subinterval of I, and these sequences are uniformly bounded in a certain sense, then
there exists a maximal T -sequence.
   For f, g ∈ `1 (Ω) we will write f ≤ g if f (u) ≤ g(u) for all u ∈ Ω.

Theorem 4. Let T be an up or down rule on an I-graded poset Ω.
   Suppose there is a sequence (b̂i ∈ `1 (Ωi ))i∈I such that for any m ≤ n there exists
a T -sequence (πi )i∈[m,n] with πi ≤ b̂i for any i ∈ [m, n]. Then there exists a maximal
T -sequence.

Proof. For any i ∈ I, let Ci = {π ∈ M (Ωi ) : π ≤ b̂i }. If we can show that Ci is
compact, the theorem will follow from Lemma 2. We can write Ci = M (Ωi ) ∩ Li
where
                    Li = {π : Ωi → R | 0 ≤ π ≤ b̂i } ⊂ `1 (Ωi ).
Since M (Ωi ) is closed it suffices to show that Li is compact. By the dominated
                                                              Q
convergence theorem Li is homeomorphic to the product space u∈Ωi [0, b̂i (u)] which
is compact by Tychonoff’s theorem.

   For the existence of a positive maximal T -sequence, it is not enough to assume
the existence of finite T -sequences that are uniformly bounded from above; they
must be uniformly bounded from above and from below simultaneously!
   Let `+
        1 (Ωi ) = {f ∈ `1 (Ωi ) : f (u) > 0 for any u ∈ Ωi } denote the set of strictly
positive `1 -functions on Ωi .
                                                                                      17

Theorem 5. Let T be an up or down rule on an I-graded poset Ω.
   Suppose there are sequences (b̌i ∈ `+                        +
                                        1 (Ωi ))i∈I and (b̂i ∈ `1 (Ωi ))i∈I such that for
any m ≤ n in I there exists a T -sequence (πi )i∈[m,n] with b̌i ≤ πi ≤ b̂i for any
i ∈ [m, n]. Then there exists a positive maximal T -sequence.

Proof. The proof is completely analogous to that of Theorem 4, but with Li =
{π : Ωi → R : b̌i ≤ π ≤ b̂i } ⊂ `1 (Ωi ).

   In most combinatorial applications, the level sets Ωi are finite. In that case, the
uniform upper bound (b̂i ) in the assumption in Theorem 4 automatically exists.
Furthermore, the requirement of uniformicity of the lower bound (b̌i ) in Theorem 5
can be relaxed.
   The following theorem is stated for an up rule, but the dual statement for a down
rule is of course equivalent.
Theorem 6. Let U be an up rule on an I-graded poset Ω with finite level sets Ωi .
Then there exists a maximal U -sequence, and there exists a positive maximal U -
sequence if and only if there is a sequence (bi : Ωi → (0, ∞))i∈I with the property that
for any m ≤ n in I there is a distribution πm,n ∈ M (Ωm ) such that U n−m πm,n ≥ bn .

Proof. Define a sequence (b̂i ∈ `1 (Ωi ))i∈I by letting b̂i (u) = 1 for any u ∈ Ωi . Now
Theorem 4 guarantees the existence of a maximal U -sequence.
  Next, suppose there is a sequence (bi : Ωi → (0, ∞))i∈I and distributions (πm,n ∈
M (Ωm ))m≤n with the property given in the theorem. Let (γi )i∈I be positive num-
bers adding to one, and for each i ∈ I put b̌i = γi bi .
                                   P
  Now, fix m ≤ n in I. Let Γ = i∈[m,n] γi and define

                                      1 X
                                 π=       γi πm,i .
                                      Γ
                                        i∈[m,n]

Since U is a linear operator, for any j ∈ [m, n] we have

                     1 X                γj           γj    b̌j
         U j−m π =       γi U j−m πm,i ≥ U j−m πm,j ≥ bj =     ≥ b̌j
                     Γ                  Γ            Γ      Γ
                      i∈[m,n]


and hence (U j−m π)j∈[m,n] is a T -sequence such that U j−m π ≥ b̌j for any j ∈ [m, n].
Theorem 5 now yields the existence of a positive maximal U -sequence.

   Theorem 6 guarantees the existence of a maximal T -sequence if all level sets are
finite, but in general it is not possible to extend a T -sequence for a subinterval
J ⊂ I to a maximal T -sequence. For example, consider the poset in Figure 7 with
a defined down rule D. The distributions π0 ∈ M (Ω0 ) and π1 ∈ M (Ω1 ) given by
π0 (0̂) = 1, π1 (s1 ) = 1/4 and π2 (s2 ) = 3/4 constitute a D-chain, but this D-chain
can obviously not be extended to the top level.
                                                                                      18

                                              1̂
                                               t
                                               @
                                   1               @ 1
                                   2                @2
                                                    R
                                                    @
                                                      @
                            s1 t                          @ts2
                                                          @
                               @
                                   @
                                    R
                                    @
                                    1@               1
                                         @
                                             @t
                                             @
                                              0̂

                Figure 7: A graded poset with a given down rule D.

5. General homogeneous Markov chains

Finally, we shall use Theorem 4 to prove a more general result about the existence
of Markov chains with time interval Z. As far as we know, this has not been treated
before.
   Let S be a countable (or finite) state space and let P be a transition function
on S, that is, an assignment of a probability P (s → s0 ) to each pair (s, s0 ) ∈ S × S
                            0
           P
such that     s0 ∈S P (s → s ) = 1 for any s ∈ S. For any initial (random) state
X0 , there is a unique Markov chain X0 , X1 , . . . with transition function P , but
is there a Markov chain . . . , X−1 , X0 , X1 , . . . with time interval Z? The following
“homogeneous” version of Theorem 4 answers that question.
Theorem 7. Let S be a state space and let P be a transition function on S. Suppose
there exists a sequence of functions (b̂i ∈ `1 (S))i∈Z such that for any integers m ≤ n
there is a Markov chain Xm , . . . , Xn on S with transition function P such that
Prob(Xi = s) ≤ b̂i (s) for any i ∈ [m, n] and any s ∈ S. Then there exists a Markov
chain . . . , X−1 , X0 , X1 , . . . on S with transition function P .

Proof. Define a Z-graded poset Ω = S × Z with (s, i) l (s0 , i + 1) if P (s, s0 ) > 0 and
define an up rule U on Ω by letting
                          U ((s, i) → (s0 , i + 1)) = P (s → s0 )
for any i ∈ Z and any s, s0 ∈ S. Now the theorem follows from Theorem 4.



6. Discussion

We have applied the results in this paper to Young’s lattice (in Section 2) and to
the d-dimensional nonnegative integer lattice (in Section 3.1).
                                                                                        19

   As mentioned in Section 2.2, a possible application to our generalization of lim-
iting object is in the study of sequences of permutations [7]. Similarly to the well-
studied Tsetlin library Markov chain (see for example [6]), such a sequence can
be generated by a stochastic process in which the number n + 1 is inserted into a
permutation of {1, 2, . . . , n} to create a permutation of {1, 2, . . . , n + 1}, wherein
each of the possible n + 1 “slots” is assigned a probability to create a probability
distribution. In terms of this paper, such probabilities constitute an up-rule U on
the N-graded poset Ω, where each level set Ωi = Si is the set of permutations of
{1, 2, . . . , i}. One direction for future research is to investigate the relation between
U and possible limiting objects of resulting permutation sequences in terms of [7].
   Other Markov chains whose state-space has a partial order occur in the study of
certain semigroups called left-regular bands (for example [2]) as well as in the study
of poset block structures ([3, 4]). Another direction for future research may thus
include investigating whether the results of the present paper may be applied also
to these families of Markov chains.



References

 [1] Andrews, G.E., Eriksson, K.: Integer partitions. Cambridge University Press
     (2004)

 [2] Brown, K.S.: Semigroups, rings, and Markov chains. Journal of Theoretical
     Probability 13(3), 871–938 (2000)

 [3] D’Angeli, D., Donno, A.: Markov chains on orthogonal block structures. Eu-
     ropean Journal of Combinatorics 31(1), 34–46 (2010)

 [4] D’Angeli, D., Donno, A.: The lumpability property for a family of Markov
     chains on poset block structures. Advances in Applied Mathematics 51(3),
     367–391 (2013)

 [5] Eriksson, K., Sjöstrand, J.: Limiting shapes of birth-and-death processes
     on Young diagrams. Adv. in Appl. Math. 48(4), 575 – 602 (2012). DOI
     10.1016/j.aam.2011.12.001

 [6] Fill, J.A.: An exact formula for the move-to-front rule for self-organizing lists.
     Journal of Theoretical Probability 9(1), 113–160 (1996)

 [7] Hoppen, C., Kohayakawa, Y., Moreira, C.G., Ráth, B., Sampaio, R.M.: Limits
     of permutation sequences. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 103(1),
     93–113 (2013)

 [8] Ross, S.M.: Introduction to probability models. Academic press (2014)
                                                                                 20

 [9] Stanley, R.P.: Differential posets. J. Amer. Math. Soc. 1(4), 919–961 (1988)

[10] Stanley, R.P.:    Enumerative combinatorics, vol. 1, Wadsworth and
     Brooks/Cole, Pacific Grove, CA, 1986; second printing (1996)

[11] Vershik, A.: Statistical mechanics of combinatorial partitions, and their limit
     shapes. Funct. Anal. Appl. 30(2), 90–105 (1996)
                                                                                                                                                                            Mälardalen University Doctoral Dissertation 223



                                                                                                                                                       PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS




                                                                               Markus Jonsson PROCESSES ON INTEGER PARTITIONS AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES
                                                                                                                                                       AND THEIR LIMIT SHAPES
                                                                                                                                                       Markus Jonsson




                                                                                                                                                                        →               →




Address: P.O. Box 883, SE-721 23 Västerås. Sweden
Address: P.O. Box 325, SE-631 05 Eskilstuna. Sweden
                                                      ISBN 978-91-7485-316-2
E-mail: info@mdh.se Web: www.mdh.se                   ISSN 1651-4238           2017
